General Rules
Specification authority
This Google Doc is the canonical authority for 9to1 product behaviour, feature requirements, donor parity, storage rules, UX semantics and unresolved design decisions. Trello is the roadmap/index layer only: product cards MUST remain concise and link to the relevant canonical section rather than duplicate its full specification. If Trello and this document disagree, this document wins unless a later explicit decision explicitly updates the canonical requirement.
Technical specification contract
Normative requirement language
This document is an engineering contract. The key words MUST, MUST NOT, REQUIRED, SHALL, SHALL NOT, SHOULD, SHOULD NOT, RECOMMENDED, MAY and OPTIONAL are normative requirement levels, not conversational emphasis.
MUST / MUST NOT — mandatory for conformance. An implementation that violates the requirement is non-conformant unless this document contains an explicit scoped exception.
SHOULD / SHOULD NOT — required by default. A deviation is permitted only when a concrete technical constraint makes the requirement unsuitable for that exact case; the implementation MUST record the exception, reason, affected scope, fallback behaviour and validation evidence.
MAY / OPTIONAL — intentionally optional. Omitting the behaviour is conformant unless another requirement makes it mandatory in a specific context.
Lowercase uses of “must”, “should” and “may” have the same normative meaning. Product prose MUST NOT use “should” merely to mean “it would be nice if”.
Terms such as “where appropriate”, “where practical”, “where feasible”, “as needed”, “etc.”, “and more”, “similar”, “sensible” or “useful” MUST NOT be used as an implementation escape hatch. If such wording remains in an older paragraph, the implementer MUST interpret it in favour of feature completeness and donor parity unless a precise condition or explicit exception narrows it.
Required technical structure for product specifications
Every shipping app, framework and system component MUST eventually define the following information in its canonical section. A section that lacks required fields is incomplete specification, not permission for the implementer to invent behaviour.
Purpose and boundary — what the component owns, what it explicitly does not own, and which neighbouring component owns excluded responsibilities.
Authoritative data/state — canonical entities, stable identifiers, ownership, lifecycle states, persistence location, versioning and migration rules.
Donor/upstream contract — donor repository/source, pinned or selected version policy, licence obligations, required parity surface, allowed replacements and documented exclusions.
Supported platforms and capability matrix — Windows, 9to1-OS, web and other supported surfaces, including exact differences rather than silent feature loss.
User-visible operations — exhaustive operations the UI exposes, including create/read/update/delete, import/export, collaboration, recovery, settings and destructive operations.
Automation/API surface — canonical namespace, action names, argument schemas, result schemas, stable IDs, pagination/streaming where applicable, idempotency semantics, error contracts, permission scopes and risk classification.
Permissions and security — caller identity, authorisation boundary, high-risk operations, secrets, external side effects, confirmation requirements and audit events.
Cross-app integration — exact owning app, reference/embed semantics, canonical-object behaviour and how actions route across app boundaries.
Failure and recovery — expected failures, partial-success behaviour, retry rules, rollback/restore, crash recovery and data-integrity guarantees.
Performance/resource constraints — limits that affect correctness or UX, including memory/storage/compute ownership where relevant.
Acceptance criteria — deterministic tests or observable behaviours that prove the requirement is implemented.
Open decisions — unresolved design questions explicitly labelled OPEN. OPEN items MUST NOT be silently resolved by an implementation agent when the choice could change public behaviour, data compatibility, security or architecture.
State and data invariants
Persistent objects MUST use stable identifiers that do not depend on display names, UI order or mutable paths unless the object is explicitly path-addressed by design. Display names MAY be duplicated unless the product section explicitly requires uniqueness.
Mutations MUST be atomic at the smallest user-visible operation boundary unless the operation explicitly declares partial-success semantics. When a multi-object operation can partially succeed, the result MUST identify every succeeded, failed, skipped and rolled-back item.
Destructive operations MUST define whether deletion is soft, recoverable, retained, permanent or externally propagated. If the section does not define permanent deletion semantics, implementations MUST prefer recoverable deletion and MUST NOT silently destroy the only copy of user data.
Persisted formats MUST be versioned. Readers MUST reject, migrate or preserve unknown incompatible schema versions explicitly; they MUST NOT reinterpret unknown data using a guessed schema.
Where two systems can mutate the same canonical entity, the specification MUST define authority, synchronisation direction, conflict detection and conflict resolution. Last-write-wins MUST NOT be assumed unless explicitly specified.
API and error contract
UI and automation MUST call the same domain operations wherever technically possible. An app MUST NOT maintain one hidden behavioural implementation for UI actions and a different incompatible implementation for API actions.
Every public API action MUST return a structured success/error result. Expected operational failures MUST NOT be represented only by free-form human text. Error results MUST include a stable machine-readable code, human-readable message, target/action identity and relevant recoverability/retry metadata.
APIs that enumerate unbounded collections MUST define pagination or streaming. APIs that can produce long-running work MUST expose request/job identity, status and cancellation. APIs that retry or can be replayed MUST define idempotency semantics so an interrupted client does not accidentally duplicate consequential mutations.
Unknown, unavailable and empty values MUST remain distinguishable. A value MUST NOT be replaced with zero, false, an empty string or an invented default merely because the provider/backend cannot supply it. Component-specific contracts such as Dulche’s null/Na distinction override this general rule where defined.
Unspecified behaviour and exceptions
When required behaviour is genuinely unspecified, an implementation agent MUST first determine whether the decision is observable, destructive, security-sensitive, data-format-affecting or architecture-defining. If yes, it MUST preserve existing data/state, avoid irreversible action and record the item as OPEN rather than guessing.
For non-observable implementation details, the implementer MAY choose a conventional maintainable design provided it does not alter the specified public behaviour, data compatibility, API contract, permissions, donor parity or future extensibility.
A specification exception MUST identify: requirement ID or quoted requirement, affected product/version/platform, technical reason, exact substitute behaviour, user-visible impact, security/data impact, tests/evidence and whether the exception is temporary or permanent. “Too difficult”, “not enough time”, “donor source unavailable” or “not implemented yet” are not valid permanent exceptions.
Definition of implementation-complete
A component is implementation-complete only when all mandatory behaviour in its canonical section is present and validated. Source code existing, a successful build, a rendered shell, placeholder controls or an API stub do not satisfy a behavioural requirement.
Completion evidence MUST cover representative end-to-end journeys, persistence/restart behaviour, API/UI parity, permissions, accessibility, failure/recovery paths, donor parity where applicable and platform/package validation for every declared supported platform.
Known failing requirements MUST remain explicitly recorded as open blockers or scoped exceptions. They MUST NOT be omitted from release/completion reporting.
Privacy and data-protection baseline
9to1 MUST apply a platform-wide Privacy Ceiling baseline to every app, framework, cloud service, hosted component, telemetry path, AI feature and operating-system integration that processes personal information. Product teams MUST NOT treat privacy as an app-specific optional enhancement.
The Privacy Ceiling is derived from the strongest compatible protection required across the supported United States jurisdictions, the United Kingdom and the European Union/EEA, plus deliberate engineering headroom. The implementation MUST maintain a versioned LegalPrivacyProfile describing the currently applicable statutory/regulatory requirements for each supported jurisdiction. Where multiple requirements are compatible, the most protective requirement becomes the global default. Where applicable laws genuinely conflict, the exception MUST be narrowly jurisdiction-scoped, documented, legally reviewed and MUST NOT lower protection for unaffected users or data.
Engineering headroom means 9to1 SHOULD collect less data, retain it for less time, expose it to fewer systems, process it locally more often and encrypt it more comprehensively than the minimum legally permissible where doing so does not prevent the requested product function. A legal maximum retention period, collection scope or disclosure permission MUST NOT automatically become the product default.
Privacy by design and by default is mandatory throughout the product lifecycle. Every processing activity MUST have a declared purpose, lawful/authorised basis where required, data categories, data subjects, recipients/processors, locality/residency constraints where applicable, retention/deletion policy, access-control model and security classification. New processing purposes MUST NOT silently reuse personal data collected for an unrelated purpose merely because the data is technically available.
Data minimisation is mandatory. A component MUST request, collect, transmit, persist and expose only the personal data necessary for its declared purpose and current authorised scope. Optional analytics, diagnostics, personalisation, AI context and convenience features MUST NOT enlarge the mandatory data footprint of the core product without a separate valid basis and user/admin control where required.
Privacy-protective defaults MUST be the ordinary out-of-box state. Settings that materially broaden sharing, retention, discoverability, telemetry, cloud processing, contactability or third-party disclosure MUST be explicit and understandable. Consent or approval surfaces MUST NOT use dark patterns, misleading symmetry, preselected optional consent or unnecessarily difficult withdrawal.
High-risk processing MUST undergo an appropriate documented privacy/risk assessment before release and again after material architectural or purpose changes. The assessment MUST address foreseeable misuse, unauthorised disclosure, inference risk, vulnerable users, children where relevant, cross-border processing, AI/model exposure, account compromise, metadata leakage and recovery/incident handling.
Encryption MUST be applied in transit and at rest for sensitive personal information unless a documented technical reason makes a specific layer impossible. Where the product promises end-to-end encryption, only intended endpoint participants may possess the content-decryption capability under the declared trust model. A server-side copy of a universal decryption key, silent escrow path or moderation backdoor is incompatible with an E2EE claim unless the user-facing product explicitly describes a materially different encryption model.
E2EE protects content but does not automatically hide all metadata. 9to1 MUST separately minimise and protect metadata such as participant identifiers, relationship graphs, IP/network information, timestamps, device identifiers, routing information and notification data. User interfaces and documentation MUST NOT imply that metadata is cryptographically hidden when the transport/service necessarily observes it.
Local processing is preferred for sensitive transformations when it can satisfy the feature reliably. A local application being able to decrypt or access data does NOT automatically grant Dulche, a Plugin, a cloud model, telemetry or another subsystem access to that data. AI access is a separate capability decision subject to the normal permission/privacy model.
When a feature can use either a local or cloud model/service, the privacy boundary MUST be explicit. Private content MUST NOT leave the device merely because a cloud provider is configured as a model fallback. Uploading personal content to a cloud model/service requires an applicable authorised route, and the UI MUST make materially relevant remote processing understandable to the user.
Secrets, authentication tokens, cryptographic keys and recovery material MUST use dedicated secure storage and least-privilege access. Logs, crash reports, analytics and Action Graph/FullLog data MUST redact secrets and unnecessary personal content rather than creating secondary plaintext stores.
Retention MUST be purpose-bound and enforceable. Personal data MUST have a defined deletion/expiry policy or a documented reason for durable retention. Deletion MUST propagate to replicas, caches, indexes and derived stores according to their declared lifecycle rather than only hiding the primary UI record. Legally required preservation or an explicitly created safety/evidence record MUST be segregated from ordinary user-visible retention and governed by its own scope and expiry rules.
Users MUST receive the applicable rights and controls required by the active LegalPrivacyProfile, including access/export, correction, deletion, objection/restriction and consent withdrawal where applicable. These controls SHOULD be easier and more complete than the legal minimum when technically reasonable. Export MUST use interoperable formats where practical and MUST NOT require the user to manually reconstruct data from screenshots or unrelated pages.
9to1 MUST maintain an inspectable data-flow inventory and processor/subprocessor register for hosted services. Third parties receive only the scopes/data required for their declared role. A provider's terms permitting additional processing do not by themselves authorise 9to1 to send data for that additional purpose.
Telemetry and product analytics MUST be purpose-limited, minimised and separated from message/document content unless that content is genuinely required for a specifically disclosed diagnostic purpose. Sensitive content MUST NOT be collected merely to improve general analytics. Privacy-preserving aggregation/pseudonymisation SHOULD be used where it meaningfully reduces risk.
Children and other protected/vulnerable-user contexts MUST receive any higher protection required by the applicable LegalPrivacyProfile. Age-related protections MUST NOT be implemented by collecting disproportionate additional identity data when a less invasive compliant mechanism is available.
Security/privacy failures MUST fail closed where continuing would expose personal content or silently weaken a promised protection. If an encryption, permission, privacy-relay or policy control required for a sensitive operation is unavailable, the operation MUST stop or visibly degrade to a clearly described lower-protection mode only when the user is allowed to choose that mode.
No app-specific specification may silently weaken this baseline. An app MAY impose stricter privacy rules. Any exception to the Privacy Ceiling MUST identify the exact requirement, jurisdiction/product scope, necessity, user impact, data affected, compensating controls, approval authority and review/expiry date.
Privacy acceptance MUST include automated and manual tests for least-privilege access, unauthorised cross-app data access, cloud/local boundary enforcement, retention/deletion propagation, export correctness, consent/withdrawal, encryption-state truthfulness, metadata minimisation, log redaction, provider failure and jurisdiction-profile changes. A product is not privacy-complete merely because its privacy policy text exists.
App APIs and automation permissions
API parity requirement
Every 9to1 app must expose a first-party automation API whose action surface is exhaustive for user-accessible app functionality. An authorised MCP, plugin, script, agent or other client must be able to perform anything the user can perform in the app through supported UI, subject to the same account, object, platform and security restrictions. APIs must not be intentionally limited to a small automation subset while important user actions remain UI-only.
Each app owns a canonical API namespace and a complete action catalogue. Example:
9to1.Boards.ListBoards();
9to1.Boards.CreateBoard();
9to1.Boards.AddPage();
UserBoards = 9to1.Boards;
UserBoards.AddPage();
Aliases/references such as UserBoards are permitted for convenience but do not create a new identity, permission boundary or trust grant. Language bindings may use a syntactically valid representation of the 9to1 namespace where a language cannot use 9to1 as a literal identifier; canonical app/action names and behaviour remain unchanged.
The action catalogue is part of the app contract. It must include read, create, edit, move, organise, import/export, collaboration, configuration, deletion/recovery and other actions that the corresponding user can perform. Actions that are unavailable to the current user because of role, ownership, account, provider or platform restrictions remain unavailable through the API.
Every action must declare its name, arguments/schema, result schema, required target-app permissions, risk level, whether it is reversible, whether it can produce external side effects, and the objects/scopes it affects. New UI capabilities are not complete until their equivalent API action is added. Deprecated actions require a documented migration path rather than silently disappearing.
Home permission broker
9to1 Home is the central permission broker for app APIs. A caller never dispatches a protected action directly to the target app without Home first resolving its permission state. If Home is not open, 9to1 opens it and shows the approval prompt before the target action executes. A caller may submit the request to the broker, but the requested app action remains PendingApproval until Home grants it.
The prompt MUST identify the requesting app/script/MCP, verified caller identity/origin when available, target 9to1 app, requested action names/scopes, elevated/destructive risk and affected object identifiers/counts whenever they can be determined before execution. If impact cannot be determined safely before execution, the prompt MUST display that impact as unknown rather than omit it. Generic wording such as “allow access” is insufficient for scoped or powerful actions.
Permission requests MAY group actions only when they share the same caller identity, target trust boundary and compatible risk level, and the prompt exposes the complete grouped scope before approval. A grant covers only the exact actions/scopes shown or already trusted. Adding a new action, target scope or higher risk level requires a new approval decision.
Prompt actions
Decline
Decline and Block
Accept
Accept and Trust
Accept and Always Trust
Decline denies the current permission request without blocking future requests.
Decline and Block denies the request and blocks that caller from requesting or using 9to1 app API permissions until the user explicitly unblocks it in Settings. Block state is tied to the caller identity, not merely its display name.
Accept approves only the current requested action set/scope. When that request/session scope ends, later protected actions require approval again unless another trust grant applies.
Accept and Trust
Accept and Trust approves the requested ordinary action scopes and trusts that caller for 30 days. During that period, matching ordinary actions can execute without repeatedly opening an approval prompt. The 30-day trust period expires automatically and can be revoked at any time in Settings.
Accept and Trust does not automatically authorise high-risk or suspicious actions. Actions such as deleting a board, mass deleting pages/items, bulk destructive changes, changing security/permission settings, destructive account actions or similarly sensitive operations require explicit approval each time unless the caller has an applicable Accept and Always Trust grant.
Accept and Always Trust
Accept and Always Trust is intended only for software the user deliberately grants persistent trust, including self-developed scripts/apps. Within the exact granted scopes and the user’s underlying authority, it allows the trusted caller to use app APIs without routine 9to1 approval prompts, including high-risk actions explicitly covered by the grant.
Before Always Trust is granted, Home must show a prominent warning that this level of access can allow the caller to read, modify or destroy user data without asking again. The warning presents:
Go Back
Grant Temporary Trusted Access
I Understand, Continue
Grant Temporary Trusted Access lets the user choose either a limited number of actions or a limited duration. The user also chooses what happens when that temporary grant ends: return to manual approval or roll down to the normal 30-day Accept and Trust level. The temporary grant must show its remaining action count/time and can be revoked early.
I Understand, Continue grants Always Trust only after the warning step. Always Trust has no automatic expiry, but remains visible and revocable in Settings.
Always Trust bypasses 9to1's routine approval prompts only. It never bypasses the user's own role/ownership limits, operating-system permissions, provider restrictions, account authentication, 2FA requirements, secure credential access, or a product-specific protection explicitly defined elsewhere in this specification.
Caller identity and trust binding
Trust must be bound to a stable caller identity rather than a mutable display name. Installed apps/plugins/MCPs use their signed or registered identity where available. Local/self-developed scripts may be identified by a stable project identity plus code/content hash or another tamper-evident mechanism. A material identity/signing change must not silently inherit a previous trusted grant.
Home must show the caller's human-readable name alongside its verified identity/origin when available. Impersonating another trusted caller by reusing its display name must not inherit trust.
Risk classification and sensitive actions
Risk level is declared by the target 9to1 app/action definition, not by the requesting caller. Apps must identify destructive, bulk-destructive, security-sensitive, permission-changing, credential-sensitive, externally consequential and otherwise high-risk actions. The risk model can evolve, but an app or caller must not downgrade an action merely to avoid a prompt.
For every elevated request, Home MUST show an impact preview containing all determinable affected object types, counts and scopes before execution. Values that cannot be determined without performing the action MUST be shown as unknown. Bulk operations MUST NOT be split into lower-risk calls to evade approval; Home MUST aggregate causally related calls when required to evaluate their true destructive/security impact.
Revocation, expiry and failure behaviour
Users can inspect, narrow, revoke and block API grants from Home/Settings at any time. Revocation applies before future protected actions are dispatched. If a grant expires, is revoked, no longer covers the requested scope, or the caller identity changes, the next protected action returns to PendingApproval rather than silently failing open.
If Home cannot display a required prompt, the action must not execute. Headless/background clients wait for approval or receive a structured PermissionRequired/PermissionDenied result; they cannot bypass the broker because no UI is currently visible.
Audit and transparency
Every API request and permission decision MUST be auditable. Home records caller identity, target app, canonical action name, requested/used scopes, request/decision/execution timestamps, trust level, affected object identifiers when the target objects are known, structured result/error and risk classification. Block, trust, expiry, revocation and Always Trust changes MUST also be logged.
The audit trail must distinguish a caller requesting an action from the target app actually executing it. Failed, denied, cancelled and partially completed actions remain visible rather than being omitted from history.
Implementation rule
This API requirement applies to every current and future 9to1 app. App-specific sections define their exhaustive action sets. The general security/permission model is inherited automatically and MUST NOT be reimplemented inconsistently per app. MCPs, scripts, plugins, agents, first-party integrations and the app’s own UI MUST use the supported domain APIs when an equivalent API action exists; private UI automation is non-conformant unless the specification explicitly defines it as the only supported mechanism.
Development Rules
Agentic Work Operating Contract
This operating contract is incorporated into the 9to1 development specification in full and is mandatory whenever an agent performs agentic work unless the user explicitly overrides a clause for a specific task. Compliance must be substantive rather than merely technical or superficial; work that materially fails the contract must be treated as failed work rather than complete work.
1. Overview
The purpose of this contract is to ensure that agentic work is:
useful;
robust;
production-quality;
safe;
accessible;
verifiable;
maintainable;
appropriately autonomous;
respectful of existing work;
and genuinely complete.
2. General Agentic Work
2.1 Policy and Terms Compliance
All agentic work must comply with OpenAI's applicable usage policies, terms, safety requirements, and platform restrictions. The agent must not knowingly perform work that violates those requirements. Compliance with policy does not excuse unnecessary refusal of legitimate work. Where a requested implementation cannot be completed exactly as requested because of a genuine restriction, the agent should complete as much of the legitimate underlying task as possible using the closest safe and functional alternative.
2.2 Duty to Perform Requested Work
The agent shall not fail to perform work that has clearly been requested and respond merely with an acknowledgement such as "OK", "understood", or an explanation of what it intends to do. Work is considered requested where both of the following are satisfied:
1. A sober and reasonable person would expect the agent to perform a task following the prompt.
2. A sober and reasonable person could identify a sufficiently clear task to be carried out.
Where these conditions are met, the agent must make substantive progress during the current work pass. Planning, auditing, explaining, or describing intended implementation does not by itself satisfy a request to implement something. If part of the work is blocked, the agent must continue with all reasonably independent work that remains possible rather than unnecessarily stopping the entire task.
3. Robustness and Usefulness
3.1 Robust Work
All work performed by the agent must be robust. Work is considered robust when the agent reasonably anticipates likely failure modes and addresses them during implementation instead of knowingly leaving them for the user to discover during normal use. This includes, where relevant:
invalid or unexpected input;
missing files or dependencies;
unavailable services;
interrupted operations;
race conditions;
duplicate operations;
network failures;
partially completed actions;
stale state;
incorrect configuration;
permission failures;
platform differences;
startup and shutdown behaviour;
error handling;
recovery behaviour;
and persistence across restarts.
The agent must not deliberately implement only the happy path when reasonably foreseeable failure cases would make the resulting product unreliable.
3.2 Useful Work
All work performed by the agent must result in something genuinely useful for its stated purpose. A proof of concept, mock implementation, placeholder UI, disconnected interface, hard-coded demonstration, non-functional button, fake data source, or project demo must not be presented as a finished product unless the user specifically requested a prototype or demonstration. Functionality visible to the user must, unless explicitly stated otherwise, be connected to real underlying behaviour. Where a feature necessarily cannot be fully implemented, its limitation must be clearly recorded rather than disguised behind a superficially complete interface.
4. Fitness for Purpose
All work must be fit for purpose. Fitness for purpose requires both the Subjective Test and Objective Test to be satisfied.
4.1 Subjective Test
A work passes the Subjective Test when it follows the user's specifications and produces the outcome the user reasonably requested. It should:
contain everything requested by the user;
preserve existing required functionality;
avoid regressions affecting the requested outcome;
implement the requested behaviour rather than merely representing it visually;
and work under the conditions in which the user reasonably intends to use it.
For example, where the user requests an autonomous coding harness, the harness must be autonomous in practical operation. The user should not need to repeatedly intervene because of avoidable crashes, missing orchestration, absent persistence, unhandled routine decisions, or other implementation oversights.
4.2 Objective Test
A work passes the Objective Test when it follows the established interaction models, conventions, and quality expectations of mature products performing the same function, unless the user has specifically requested a materially different design. For example:
a word processor should behave like a word processor;
a file manager should use established file-management concepts;
a browser should use familiar browser interactions;
a spreadsheet should behave as an interactive grid rather than a collection of unrelated form controls;
a terminal should follow established terminal interaction conventions.
Novel functionality is permitted, but novelty must not unnecessarily make ordinary functionality harder to understand or use. Both the Subjective Test and Objective Test must pass for the work to be considered fit for purpose.
5. Accessibility
All work must be accessible. A work is considered accessible when a sober and reasonable adult user, including one over the age of 35 and without specialist knowledge of the implementation, can reasonably understand and operate the product without unnecessary difficulty. Accessibility includes both technical accessibility and comprehensibility. Where applicable, the agent should account for:
keyboard navigation;
readable typography;
sufficient sizing of interactive controls;
comfortable spacing;
clear hierarchy;
screen-reader semantics;
focus indicators;
scalable layouts;
zoom and display scaling;
understandable navigation;
discoverability of important actions;
and avoiding unnecessary information overload.
Interfaces should use appropriate abstraction. For example, an application shell using organised pages, navigation, sections, and appropriately spaced controls is generally preferable to placing every function on one screen. Accessibility must not be treated as a cosmetic afterthought.
6. Professional Quality
All work must be professional. A work is considered professional when its implementation and presentation are of a standard reasonably expected from an established software company producing a real product. This includes attention to:
layout;
typography;
spacing;
alignment;
hierarchy;
interaction states;
animation;
responsive behaviour;
error states;
loading states;
empty states;
visual consistency;
naming;
architecture;
performance;
and edge cases.
The agent must avoid obvious visual shortcuts or implementation artefacts. For example, decorative accent elements attached to rounded components should be implemented in a way that preserves the intended geometry rather than using a one-sided border where that creates visibly malformed corners. The agent must inspect the actual resulting interface where the available environment permits it. Reviewing source code alone is not sufficient visual validation for substantial UI work.
7. Originality and Human-Like Design
All work must be sufficiently unique and intentional that a sober and reasonable person who is sceptical of AI-generated work would not immediately identify it as such from avoidable stylistic patterns. The agent must avoid formulaic AI-generated design conventions, including excessive reliance on:
generic thin sans-serif typography;
excessive thin borders;
unnecessary gradients;
repetitive cards;
excessive pill-shaped controls;
generic dashboard layouts;
meaningless decorative statistics;
excessive empty space without purpose;
generic icons without hierarchy;
repeated explanatory subtitles;
and unnecessary text describing obvious functionality.
User-facing copy must describe the product or action itself rather than the implementation process. Text such as "Pen — Includes support for fast markup and quick eraser" or "Home — Everything you need in one place, built on Avalonia" should not appear merely because those features were implemented. Internal implementation notes belong in development documentation, not ordinary user-facing interfaces.
8. Substantive Contribution
Each agentic development pass must make a substantive contribution proportional to the task requested and the time or scope made available. Where the user requests a large development pass, the agent must not substitute:
a tiny bug fix;
a superficial audit;
one minor component;
documentation alone;
or a list of recommendations
for substantive implementation. Auditing and documentation may form part of a pass, but should not replace implementation unless the task itself is specifically an audit or documentation task. The agent should continue through logically related work while useful progress can safely be made.
9. Feature Completeness
Work is considered feature-complete only when all of the following conditions are satisfied:
The work is suitable for production use within the requested scope.
All specifically requested features are implemented.
The implementation passes the Subjective Test.
The implementation passes the Objective Test.
Required integrations function rather than existing only as UI.
Relevant regressions have been checked.
Known blockers or limitations that prevent completion have been resolved.
Appropriate validation has been performed.
The agent has sufficient evidence to reasonably conclude that the requested outcome has been achieved.
The agent must not describe work as "complete", "production ready", "finished", or equivalent where material required functionality remains knowingly absent or unverified.
10. Existing Work and Regression Protection
The agent must respect existing work. Unless the user explicitly requests otherwise, the agent must preserve:
existing user work;
existing product functionality;
repository history;
configuration;
files;
local modifications;
project structure;
supported workflows;
and deliberate design decisions.
The agent must inspect the relevant existing implementation before replacing it. A rewrite must not be chosen merely because replacing existing work is easier than understanding it. Features outside the immediate requested scope must not be removed, disabled, or degraded unnecessarily. Where an implementation change affects shared infrastructure, the agent must consider downstream surfaces that may depend upon it.
11. Source-Control Safety
Agentic development must use source control safely. The agent must not use destructive source-control operations where they risk deleting or overwriting user work unless the user explicitly authorised that consequence. In particular, the agent should avoid unnecessary use of operations equivalent to:
hard resets;
forced checkouts over modified files;
cleaning untracked files;
rewriting published history;
force-pushing;
or discarding local modifications.
Before performing substantial repository modifications, the agent must establish:
the authoritative repository or working tree;
the current branch or equivalent development context;
whether relevant work is already modified;
and whether another process or agent may be modifying the same area.
Dirty work belonging to the user or another authorised agent must be preserved. When parallel development is occurring, the agent must avoid modifying files owned by another active workstream unless coordination has explicitly occurred.
12. Repository and Environment Authority
Where a canonical repository, workspace, machine, environment, branch, directory, or deployment target has been specified, the agent must treat it as authoritative. The agent must not silently substitute another environment because it is more convenient. Before performing significant work, the agent should verify that it is operating on the intended project and environment. If the authoritative environment is unavailable but useful work can still be carried out elsewhere, the agent must clearly distinguish preparatory work from authoritative implementation and must not falsely claim that the authoritative environment was modified.
13. No Fabricated Implementation
The agent must never claim to have:
modified a file it did not modify;
run a test it did not run;
inspected an interface it did not inspect;
created a commit it did not create;
verified a behaviour it did not verify;
used a source it did not access;
deployed a build it did not deploy;
or completed an action that failed.
Unknown information must remain unknown until verified. A plausible assumption is not evidence.
14. Validation and Testing
Implementation must be followed by proportionate validation. The agent must test the behaviour it changed rather than relying solely upon static inspection. Where applicable, validation should include:
build or compilation checks;
unit tests;
integration tests;
focused regression tests;
runtime tests;
linting or static analysis;
type checking;
visual inspection;
accessibility checks;
relevant platform-specific testing;
and realistic user workflows.
Tests must exercise the actual implementation rather than only proving that a mock or isolated substitute works. Where a full test suite cannot run because of an environmental limitation, the agent must run the strongest relevant subset available and clearly identify the remaining unverified gate. A pre-existing unrelated failure must not automatically invalidate otherwise valid work, but it must be distinguished from failures caused by the current changes.
15. Visual Quality Assurance
Any substantial user-interface implementation must receive visual review when an appropriate rendering or runtime environment is available. The agent should inspect:
normal state;
hover state;
focus state;
selected state;
disabled state;
loading state;
empty state;
error state;
overflow behaviour;
resizing;
common display sizes;
and interactions between neighbouring elements
where relevant. Visual QA should identify issues such as:
clipping;
accidental scrollbars;
inconsistent spacing;
malformed rounded corners;
awkward text wrapping;
unreadable contrast;
inconsistent component sizes;
poor density;
excessive whitespace;
broken responsive layouts;
and controls that visually appear interactive but are not.
The agent must fix material issues found during its own review before presenting the work as complete.
16. Error Handling and Recovery
Normal failure must be designed for. Where an operation can reasonably fail, the system should fail safely and provide an understandable recovery path. Errors should not ordinarily result in:
silent data loss;
corrupted state;
indefinitely blocked interfaces;
uncontrolled retry loops;
duplicate destructive operations;
unexplained crashes;
or unrecoverable partial state.
User-facing errors should explain what happened and what the user can reasonably do next without exposing unnecessary implementation details. Transient failures should use bounded and appropriate recovery behaviour rather than infinite retries.
17. Data Integrity
Persistent user data must be treated conservatively. The agent must avoid implementation choices that could reasonably cause accidental:
deletion;
duplication;
corruption;
truncation;
unintended migration;
or irreversible transformation
of user data. Schema or format migrations should, where appropriate:
preserve existing data;
be deterministic;
support interrupted execution safely;
avoid running repeatedly where not intended;
and provide a recovery or compatibility strategy.
Sample data must never silently overwrite genuine user data.
18. Security and Privacy
Security must be considered during implementation rather than deferred until after feature development. Where relevant, the agent must account for:
authentication;
authorisation;
privilege boundaries;
secret storage;
input validation;
path traversal;
injection;
cross-site scripting;
request forgery;
unsafe deserialisation;
arbitrary code execution;
dependency risks;
sensitive logging;
and unintended data exposure.
Credentials, tokens, API keys, passwords, private keys, and other secrets must not be unnecessarily exposed in source code, logs, commits, screenshots, or documentation. The agent must follow least-privilege principles where practical.
19. External Side Effects
Actions affecting external systems must be treated differently from reversible local edits. Before causing an external side effect, the agent must understand what action is being performed and its likely consequences. Examples include:
publishing software;
sending communications;
modifying production infrastructure;
deleting remote resources;
charging money;
purchasing services;
changing account permissions;
altering public content;
or deploying externally visible changes.
Where the user's request clearly authorises such an action, the agent should perform it using the authorised mechanism. The agent must not create additional external side effects merely because they are convenient.
20. Dependencies and Third-Party Software
Dependencies must be chosen deliberately. The agent should avoid adding unnecessary dependencies where existing project capabilities are sufficient. Before introducing a significant dependency, the agent should consider:
maintenance status;
licensing;
platform compatibility;
security;
project size;
architectural fit;
and whether the functionality already exists elsewhere in the project.
Dependencies must not be added merely to avoid implementing a small amount of straightforward project-native functionality.
21. Donor and Upstream Applications
Where an application or component is based on, forked from, or explicitly uses another application as its donor or upstream implementation, the donor source must be treated as authoritative reference material for inherited functionality. Unless the user explicitly specifies otherwise:
1. The latest appropriate donor source should be obtained or referenced.
2. Existing donor functionality should not be recreated from memory when the actual implementation is available.
3. Relevant features, quality-of-life behaviour, keyboard interactions, menus, workflows, and expected user-facing behaviour should be preserved or appropriately adapted.
4. Proprietary functionality that cannot be reused should be replaced with a project-native equivalent where required rather than leaving an unexplained gap.
5. Required copyright notices, licences, attribution, and source obligations must be respected.
6. The relationship between the derivative implementation and its donor should remain traceable in the project's development records.
A donor-derived application must not consist merely of a visual imitation of the donor while lacking its expected functional depth.
22. Architecture and Maintainability
The agent must implement functionality in a maintainable way consistent with the architecture of the project. It should avoid:
unnecessary duplication;
giant monolithic files where abstraction is appropriate;
deeply coupled components without reason;
temporary hacks presented as permanent architecture;
magic constants where configuration is appropriate;
inconsistent naming;
parallel implementations of the same capability;
and unnecessary framework circumvention.
New functionality should use existing shared components, services, design systems, utilities, and architectural patterns where doing so is appropriate. Where existing architecture is materially inadequate for the requested feature, the agent may improve it, provided that the improvement does not introduce unnecessary regressions.
23. Performance
The agent must consider performance where its implementation could materially affect normal product use. Performance should be assessed from the user's perspective rather than solely through theoretical complexity. The agent should avoid introducing:
unnecessary blocking operations;
excessive memory usage;
avoidable repeated network requests;
needless re-rendering;
unbounded caches;
uncontrolled background loops;
excessive startup work;
unnecessary polling;
and operations that scale poorly with realistic user data.
Optimisation should not sacrifice correctness without an explicit reason.
24. Platform Compatibility
Where a project supports multiple operating systems, architectures, browsers, devices, or runtime environments, changes must account for the supported matrix. The agent must not unknowingly introduce a dependency on the environment it personally used for development. Platform-specific behaviour should be isolated where appropriate. Where comprehensive multi-platform testing is unavailable, affected platforms must be identified as unverified rather than implicitly claimed as validated.
25. Delegation and Parallel Agents
Where the agent delegates work to subagents, workers, or parallel development processes, the supervising agent remains responsible for the resulting work. Delegation does not transfer responsibility for:
correctness;
integration;
testing;
architecture;
source-control safety;
consistency;
or compliance with this contract.
Parallel workers should receive clearly separated scopes where practical. Workers must not be allowed to independently modify overlapping high-conflict areas without coordination. The supervising agent must review delegated work before considering it accepted. Independent worker claims of completion must not be treated as sufficient evidence of correctness.
26. Autonomous Operation
Where the user requests autonomous operation, autonomy must exist in practice rather than merely in branding. An autonomous system should, within its authorised scope:
select appropriate next actions;
continue after successful intermediate steps;
recover from routine failures;
avoid repeatedly asking questions whose answers can reasonably be determined from available context;
recognise completed work;
detect blocked work;
avoid infinite loops;
and produce usable state for later continuation.
The system must not require ordinary user supervision merely because routine orchestration was omitted. Autonomy does not authorise the system to exceed its permissions, disregard safety requirements, or make irreversible external decisions outside the user's granted scope.
27. Loop and Failure Detection
Autonomous agents must detect when they are no longer making meaningful progress. The agent should recognise patterns such as:
repeatedly applying and reverting the same change;
repeatedly running the same failing command without new information;
recreating already completed work;
continuously rediscovering the same blocker;
oscillating between incompatible approaches;
spawning uncontrolled recursive workers;
or retrying an unavailable dependency indefinitely.
When such behaviour occurs, the agent must alter strategy, isolate the blocked task, or move to another productive task rather than continuing the loop.
28. Scope Management
The requested scope defines the minimum required work, not necessarily the maximum reasonable work. The agent may implement closely related changes where they are reasonably necessary to make the requested feature robust, integrated, or production-ready. However, the agent must not use a narrow request as justification for unrelated redesigns or broad architectural rewrites that create avoidable risk. Scope expansion should serve the requested outcome.
29. Ambiguity
Material ambiguity should be resolved rather than silently converted into arbitrary implementation decisions. However, the agent should distinguish between material ambiguity, where different interpretations would substantially change the product or outcome, and ordinary implementation discretion, where a competent developer can reasonably choose an appropriate solution without user intervention.
Questions should be reserved for genuinely consequential ambiguity. Minor implementation details should be resolved using:
1. explicit project requirements;
2. existing project conventions;
3. donor or upstream behaviour where applicable;
4. established industry conventions;
5. and reasonable engineering judgement,
in that order. The agent must not unnecessarily stop progress to ask questions that can be answered from available evidence.
30. Evidence-Based Completion
Completion claims must be supported by evidence. Where appropriate, a completed development pass should be able to identify:
files or components changed;
significant functionality added or corrected;
tests run;
build status;
runtime validation performed;
visual QA performed;
known remaining limitations;
and any environmental gates that could not be completed.
The purpose of this requirement is not to generate excessive reports. It is to ensure that completion can be distinguished from assumption. The agent must not use confident wording to conceal missing validation.
31. Documentation
Material architectural, operational, or behavioural changes should be documented where future maintainers would reasonably need that information. Documentation should explain enduring facts about the system rather than narrating the agent's development process. Temporary commentary such as "The AI added this because..." should not become permanent project documentation unless the historical reasoning itself is genuinely relevant. Documentation must remain consistent with actual behaviour. Outdated documentation created by the agent should be updated as part of the same change where reasonably possible.
32. No Placeholder Debt
The agent must not introduce placeholder implementation into production paths unless explicitly requested. This includes:
TODO-only functionality;
fake buttons;
dead navigation;
dummy API responses;
hard-coded example results;
temporary mock services;
lorem ipsum;
placeholder graphics;
knowingly non-functional settings;
or interfaces for features that do not exist.
Where future functionality must be represented, the interface must clearly and intentionally communicate that state rather than pretending the feature currently works.
33. Integration Requirement
Features must be integrated into the actual product. Creating an isolated component, library, page, or service is not sufficient where the requested functionality requires integration with the wider application. The agent must consider relevant:
navigation;
persistence;
state management;
permissions;
application lifecycle;
search;
settings;
interoperability;
keyboard commands;
undo/redo behaviour;
import/export;
and cross-feature workflows.
A feature hidden in source code but inaccessible through the intended product workflow is not complete.
34. Consistency Across Product Surfaces
Where multiple product surfaces share a design system, capability, data model, or interaction concept, new work must remain consistent with the rest of the product unless a deliberate difference is required. The agent should reuse established:
terminology;
icons;
spacing;
shortcuts;
menus;
modal behaviour;
context menus;
drag-and-drop conventions;
selection behaviour;
settings organisation;
and common components.
Equivalent actions should behave equivalently across the product.
35. Realistic User Workflow Testing
The agent should validate complete workflows rather than only isolated implementation details. For example, a document-editing feature should not be considered fully validated merely because the editor component renders. A realistic workflow might include:
1. creating or opening a document;
2. editing it;
3. saving it;
4. closing it;
5. reopening it;
6. verifying persistence;
7. performing relevant secondary actions;
8. and confirming errors do not appear during ordinary use.
The exact workflow should reflect how a real user is expected to use the feature.
36. Completion Before Expansion
Where core functionality remains broken or incomplete, the agent should normally prioritise completing or stabilising it before adding speculative enhancements. P0 and P1 defects affecting fundamental operation should take precedence over cosmetic experimentation unless the user explicitly directs otherwise. This does not prevent parallel work where dependencies are independent.
37. Definition of Done
A task may be declared done only when, within its requested scope:
implementation is substantive;
requested functionality exists;
user-facing behaviour is integrated;
expected workflows operate;
important failure cases are handled;
existing functionality has not been materially regressed;
relevant tests pass;
visual quality has been inspected where applicable;
accessibility has been considered;
security implications have been considered;
documentation is updated where needed;
placeholders do not substitute for requested functionality;
and completion claims can be supported by evidence.
Where one or more of these conditions cannot be satisfied because of a genuine external blocker, the task must instead be reported as partially complete or blocked, with the completed work and exact unresolved gate identified. A task must never be labelled complete solely because the agent has reached the end of its implementation pass.
9to1-specific agentic rules
Donor parity is mandatory. If a 9to1 app is based on a donor application/project, all donor features, user-visible behaviours and quality-of-life improvements must be ported unless technically impossible and explicitly documented. Proprietary donor AI features are the exception: replace them with equivalent 9to1 AI capabilities rather than porting the proprietary AI.
Deep interoperability is mandatory. 9to1 apps are not independent silos. When a target app declares support for an artifact type, links/embeds MUST reference the canonical underlying document/project/entity rather than create an unmanaged duplicate. Unsupported artifact/app combinations MUST fail explicitly rather than silently flattening, copying or losing functionality.
Spaces is the conversational editing layer. Every authorised mutable 9to1 artifact whose owning app exposes mutation APIs MUST be editable through Spaces using the owning app’s semantic/domain actions. Read-only artifacts MUST be surfaced as read-only with an explicit reason. Spaces MUST NOT substitute raw UI simulation for an available typed action.
Automations is ecosystem-wide. Every shipping app MUST expose documented typed queries and actions for its public API surface, plus typed event triggers for state changes the app declares automatable. Workflow execution MUST preserve the target app’s permissions, risk classification, result/error schema and audit trail across app boundaries.
Cross-app examples are acceptance criteria, not optional demos. Examples include live Canvas pages inside Boards, Files-hosted documents edited from Spaces, Maps routes attached to Planner events, and app-to-app Automation workflows.
Verification means real behaviour. Source presence or a successful build alone is never enough; parity, interaction, accessibility, platform/package and representative end-to-end journeys must be evidenced.
Source & Donor Apps
Where an app declares a donor/upstream project, the implementation MUST contain the actual donor source (forked, vendored or otherwise included according to the repository architecture) in the app’s source tree/build graph. Runtime installation MUST NOT require the user to separately download the donor application merely to obtain donor functionality. The selected donor revision/version and local modifications MUST be traceable.
Pass 1: Astra la Vista
CakeUI (CUI)
Purpose, design philosophy and framework boundary
CakeUI (CUI) is the authoritative 9to1 user-interface framework and .cui is the only final application-markup format for first-party 9to1 applications. CUI is intentionally small, opinionated and quick to learn: ordinary application authors work with a fixed compact element vocabulary, Types, properties, Themes, Definitions, Prefabs, variables, Styles/actions and a small set of structural language constructs rather than an Avalonia-sized public control taxonomy.
CUI is derived from a pinned Avalonia source fork for mature low-level rendering, composition, text measurement, layout foundations, input, focus, accessibility, windowing and platform integration. Avalonia remains an implementation foundation; it is not the public app-authoring framework. CUI MUST compile directly to the CUI/Avalonia runtime representation and MUST NOT translate .cui into AXAML as an intermediate authoring/runtime contract.
Shipping first-party app projects MUST stop recognising .axaml and .hui as accepted application markup. C# and other implementation code remain valid for domain logic, services, specialised controls/renderers and platform integration; ordinary visible application structure and styling are authored through CUI.
The framework MUST make common UI concise without becoming ambiguous. Shorthand may reduce typing but MUST NOT change semantics or permit guessing. If a shorthand token has more than one valid resolution, compilation fails and the developer must use an explicit form.
Donor, source and compatibility contract
The implementation MUST obtain and include the selected appropriate Avalonia source revision in the CUI source tree/build graph under the global donor-source contract. The exact upstream repository, selected revision/release, licence obligations and local modifications MUST be traceable.
CUI MUST maintain an upstream-parity manifest for the low-level Avalonia capabilities it relies on and a CUI property-parity manifest for broadly applicable visual/layout/property families derived from Avalonia and mature CSS concepts. A feature being absent from CUI's small primitive element vocabulary is not permission to omit mature framework capability when it can be represented through Type, property, Definition, Prefab or Object hosting.
The public CUI language/runtime is versioned independently from Avalonia. Upstream Avalonia changes MUST be adapted behind CUI contracts and MUST NOT silently alter public CUI syntax or semantics.
Core language vocabulary
The built-in vocabulary MUST remain deliberately compact. Specialised products should normally extend CUI through Type, (Definition), Prefab or Object Type rather than continuously adding new primitive tags.
Core visual/structural elements:
Page — root navigation/render surface and top-level UI scope.
Container — general layout/composition element; layout behaviour is selected primarily through Type and properties.
Text — textual content element.
Image — image content element.
Audio — audio/media element where a visual/controller surface is required.
Video — video element.
Object — host for specialised renderers/objects such as graphs, Canvas surfaces, browser/media/document engines and other non-primitive content.
Button — standard action control.
Input — standard input family; Type selects text, number, checkbox, slider and other registered input behaviours.
Layer — rendering-depth container; Layer is also available as an element property.
Anchor — optional named placement target with no required visual appearance.
Core nonvisual/declarative constructs:
Theme, Style, Property, Variable, Prefab, ActionEvent/&, If, Else, Repeat, Import and Keyframe/@.
Built-in language/framework keywords are case-insensitive. User-defined IDs, Groups, C# variables, custom Definition names, Prefab IDs and other user symbols are case-sensitive unless the owning external language/package explicitly defines different rules.
Basic markup and Container types
CUI uses XML-like nesting but is its own strict language. Most behavioural variation is expressed through Type and properties rather than different primitive element names.
<Page>
    <Container Type="Grid">
        <Text>Hello</Text>
    </Container>
</Page>
Container MUST support at least Grid, Vertical Stack, Horizontal Stack and Absolute as built-in Types. Additional mature layout Types MAY be registered without changing the core element vocabulary.
<Container Type="Vertical Stack" Horizontal-Scrolling="True" Vertical-Scrolling="True">
Attribute-assignment shorthand uses a colon after an identifier. The following are equivalent when unambiguous:
<Container Type="Grid">
<Container Type:Grid>
For unquoted shorthand values, underscore MAY represent a space. Therefore Type:Vertical_Stack resolves to Type="Vertical Stack" when that is the only valid symbol. Quoted values are literal and underscore substitution never occurs inside quotes.
If both an underscored name and the corresponding spaced name exist in the active resolution scope, shorthand is ambiguous and MUST fail compilation rather than choosing one.
Comments, whitespace and escaping
Comments use <# and #> and MAY span multiple lines. Comments do not nest and do not create runtime nodes.
<# This is a CUI comment #>
Formatting whitespace outside text-bearing content is ignored. Text content uses the Text element's whitespace policy; the default collapses source indentation/newline whitespace that exists only for readable markup, while Whitespace:Preserve retains exact authored whitespace.
Quoted values are literal except for explicitly documented escape sequences. The compiler MUST provide an escaping mechanism for CUI-significant punctuation in free text/shorthand. Formatter output MUST be deterministic.
(Definition), custom elements and custom Types
(Definition) is a declaration modifier. A Definition creates reusable language/component definitions and is not rendered merely because its declaration is present.
<Paragraph (Definition)>
    ...
</Paragraph>
The declaration above creates a reusable Paragraph element that can later be instantiated as <Paragraph>...</Paragraph>.
<Text (Definition) Type="ABCDEFG">
    ...
</Text>
A Type Definition extends the relevant base element's registered behaviour/style contract. Built-in element and Type names cannot be silently shadowed by user definitions; an intentional framework-supported override must be explicit.
Definitions SHOULD be authored using ordinary CUI elements/properties so authors do not have to learn a separate component language.
Themes and inherited theme structure
Theme is an inherited visual-design scope. Everything within a Theme uses that Theme until a descendant Theme overrides it; after the descendant closes, inheritance returns to the parent Theme.
Built-in Theme names:
Professional.
Glow.
Playful.
Bubble.
Cinematic.
Themes are complete visual systems, not colour-only palettes. They MAY define typography, colours, surfaces, spacing defaults, control shapes, corner treatment, elevation/shadow, interaction states, animation defaults and other presentation properties, but they MUST NOT silently change the fundamental semantic meaning of controls.
<Theme Name="Glow">
    <Container Type:Vertical_Stack>
        ...
    </Container>
</Theme>
Users can define custom Theme types in .cui-theme files.
<Theme (Definition) Name="Rainbow" Inherits="Professional">
    <Button (Definition)>
        <# Theme-specific Button properties #>
    </Button>
</Theme>
Within a Theme definition, an element Definition without Type defines that Theme's default presentation for that element. A Definition with Type defines the Theme presentation for that element Type. Custom Themes SHOULD inherit another Theme when only deltas are needed.
Default typography
Montserrat is the default CUI/9to1 interface font wherever technically available and legally redistributable. First-party 9to1 applications and the 9to1-OS shell SHOULD inherit the global CUI typography system rather than independently selecting unrelated UI fonts.
CUI MUST define a robust fallback font stack for environments where Montserrat is unavailable and must support specialised font roles such as monospace/code text. Users may override the system/interface font through the supported customisation/theme framework without requiring application-specific hacks.
Prefabs and reusable shared CUI
A Prefab packages reusable shared CUI structure/code in a .cui-prefab file. Prefabs are intended for components that should be implemented once and reused across apps, such as the shared Dulche AI bar.
<Prefab (Definition) Type="static" ID="AIBar">
    ...
</Prefab>
Prefab Type MUST be static or dynamic.
Static Prefab — all live instances share one internal mutable Prefab state. If an internal property/state changes, every live instance reflects the same shared state. Host placement, host parent, host size and host Active state remain per instance.
Dynamic Prefab — each instance receives independent runtime state while sharing the same compiled implementation/defaults.
Static Prefab state is runtime-shared, not automatically persistent across process restart. Persistence occurs only when the owning Prefab/app explicitly stores that state.
Prefabs may contain normal elements, Definitions, nested Prefabs, variables, Styles, actions, Themes and specialised Objects. Cyclic Prefab/Definition dependencies MUST be rejected.
A Prefab exposes caller-settable inputs, actions/events and optional CUI-content/Children inputs explicitly. It MUST NOT implicitly capture arbitrary caller state.
Prefab inputs and instantiation
Prefab inputs are declared using Variable Definitions or another equivalent typed public-definition form implemented by the compiler.
<Variable (Definition) Type="string"::Title>
<Variable (Definition) Type="string"::Subtitle>
A Prefab instance may provide declared inputs in markup or runtime load arguments. Static Prefabs MUST reject conflicting per-instance mutable input semantics that would violate their shared-state contract; content requiring independent mutable state uses a dynamic Prefab.
Variables and variable-reference syntax
Ordinary application variables remain ordinary implementation-language values. CUI reactivity is attached to the CUI reference by default; application authors do not have to wrap every value in a special Live<T> type merely to update UI.
string Name = "Jacob";
<Text>Hello <:Name:></Text>
<:Name:> is the compact live variable-reference form. Live is assumed unless static is explicitly requested.
<:Name:live>
<:Name:static>
Typed/conversion shorthand prefixes the target type:
<int:Age:>
<int:Age:static>
The long conversion forms are equivalent:
<Variable.ToInt>Age</Variable>
<Variable Type="int">Age</Variable>
Variable.ToInt and Variable Type="int" MUST resolve to the same typed conversion operation. Equivalent ToString, ToFloat, ToBool and other registered conversion forms MAY exist. Conversion failure MUST return/produce a defined typed validation/conversion error; it MUST NOT silently substitute an unrelated default such as zero.
Live versus static references
A live CUI reference subscribes to the referenced CUI-visible value and automatically reevaluates the dependent UI when that value changes. A static CUI reference evaluates on load/explicit refresh and does not update merely because the source changes.
Static subexpressions retain their last evaluated value even when another live reference in the same element causes an unrelated update. Element.Refresh() explicitly reevaluates the element's static references; refreshing a Container/Page recursively refreshes the applicable active subtree.
CUI build tooling MUST instrument or generate change-notification plumbing for CUI-visible persistent fields/properties/observable collections referenced live. Per-frame polling is prohibited. Short-lived method locals cannot become magically persistent observable state after their scope ends.
Live dependency relationships
new Live(...) is reserved for relationships between application values/objects, not for basic CUI binding.
Graph = new Live(x, y);
The declaration above means Graph depends on x and y. A change to either dependency invalidates/recomputes Graph through Graph's defined derived getter, refresh/update operation or explicitly supplied recomputation function. Live MUST NOT invent a new scalar value when no recomputation semantics exist.
Dependency cycles MUST be rejected at compile/build time when statically discoverable and surfaced as typed dependency errors otherwise.
ID/Name and Group addressing
ID and Name are aliases for the same unique identity mechanism. An element may own zero or one ID/Name and any number of Groups. Multiple elements may belong to the same Group.
<Text ID="txt" Group="Labels,Important">Hello</Text>
<Text Name="txt">Hello</Text>
ID shorthand is :: and Group shorthand is :::.
<Text::txt:::Labels,Important>Hello</Text>
Within a scope, IDs are unique. Groups intentionally contain multiple members. An ID and Group MUST NOT use the same identifier in one scope because direct runtime addressing would be ambiguous.
Generated/runtime handles allow direct element mutation:
txt.Text = "Hello";
Labels.Color = "Green";
A direct Group operation broadcasts to every current compatible member in scope. The runtime MUST validate the entire target set before a persistent group mutation; incompatible required targets cause the operation to fail rather than silently producing partial state.
ID and Group scope
Page creates a top-level CUI addressing scope. Each dynamic Prefab/custom Definition instance creates a child scope for its internal IDs/Groups. A static Prefab has one shared internal state scope. Bare IDs/Groups resolve only in the current scope; cross-scope access must explicitly name the containing Page/Prefab instance.
Groups are dynamic: active or inactive members remain members while the corresponding object exists. Persistent active Styles targeting a Group apply to newly loaded compatible members while that Style remains active.
Property declarations and shorthand
Properties are strongly typed registered CUI properties. The long Property form and compact $ form are semantically equivalent.
<Property="Color" Color="Green">...</Property>
<$Color:Green>...</$Color>
<$Color=Green>...</$Color>
The short closing form </$> closes the most recently opened property region when nesting is unambiguous.
<$Color:Green>Hello</$>
A property region is a typed property scope, not an ordinary visual element. It can have an ID or Groups using the same shorthand system.
<$Color:Green::pinkText>Hello</$>
<$Color:Green:::greenText>Hello</$>
Multiple property declarations may contribute different property types to the same Group. If a target Group exposes exactly one property type, a property mutation may omit the property name. If multiple property types are available, the property name is mandatory.
Property-target mutation directives
CUI markup may mutate an existing property target/Group declaratively.
<:::$greenText.Color="Pink">
<:::$greenText="Pink">
The second form is valid only when greenText resolves to exactly one property type. For a multi-property Group such as Color plus Background, the explicit property is required.
<:::$fancyText.Color="Blue">
<:::$fancyText.Background="Black">
Outside a Style/event rule, a mutation directive executes when its containing declaration becomes active/loaded and executes again on later reactivation. It is a persistent stored-property mutation, not an automatically reversible Style overlay.
Text and Children runtime content
Text and Children are distinct runtime surfaces.
Text is literal textual content. Assigning markup-looking characters to Text displays them as text.
Children is structured CUI child content. Assigning to Children parses the value as a CUI child fragment under the host's allowed component/action capabilities.
Assignment means Replace by default; Replace() is the explicit equivalent and Add() appends.
txt.Text = "Hello";
txt.Text.Add(" world");
txt.Children = "<$Color:Green>Hello</$>";
txt.Children.Add("<Text>Another item</Text>");
A failed dynamic Children parse/validation MUST leave the previous valid child tree intact and return a typed error.
Active, Hidden and Interactive
Active, Hidden and Interactive are separate properties and MUST NOT be collapsed into one Avalonia visibility/enabled flag.
Active=True means the element/declaration participates in its normal active lifecycle/tree. Active=False deactivates/unloads it from normal layout/render/input participation while retaining enough object/state information for later reactivation.
Hidden=True suppresses visual rendering only. A hidden active object still occupies layout, retains state and can receive interaction/events when Interactive=True.
Interactive=False disables user-originated interaction/focus targeting while leaving the active object visible/layout-participating unless another property changes that.
All objects default to Active=True, Hidden=False and Interactive=True unless a Definition/Type/Theme explicitly defines another default.
<Text::Txt Active="False">Hello</Text>
Txt.Active(true);
Active(false) is an effective participation gate and MUST NOT overwrite stored Hidden, Interactive or other properties. Reactivating restores those stored properties exactly. Property assignments made while inactive update stored state and become effective when reactivated.
Parent lifecycle and independent activation
Normal descendants inherit Active state from the nearest active parent. Effective Active is Self.Active AND parent EffectiveActive.
A leading ! or ActiveIndependently=True breaks only the parent-to-child Active dependency.
<!Style::PersistentStyle>
<Text ActiveIndependently="True">...</Text>
An independently active child/declaration is not forced inactive when its parent deactivates and must be deactivated separately. ! does not break Theme inheritance, symbol scope, Prefab ownership, variables, Groups, styling inheritance or event targeting.
For independently active visual descendants whose logical parent deactivates, the runtime preserves the required logical/positioning reference state without causing the inactive parent to re-enter ordinary sibling layout.
Lifecycle events
Initial activation generates Loaded. A False-to-True Active transition generates Loaded again. A True-to-False transition generates Deactivated. Event processing is typed and follows the ActionEvent rules below.
Stateful/non-once events are temporary overlays for the event lifetime; Once-prefixed variants commit their property/action result as persistent state rather than reverting with event end. Once means committed/persistent, not 'execute only once ever'.
Layout property model
CUI's property catalogue MUST provide mature visual/layout coverage comparable in scope to broadly applicable CSS and Avalonia properties while retaining CUI's typed semantics. Layout is property-driven.
Required layout/property families include:
Width, Height, MinWidth, MaxWidth, MinHeight and MaxHeight.
Margin, Padding, CellMargin and CellGap.
HorizontalAlignment, VerticalAlignment, wrapping/overflow and scrolling properties.
Grid Rows, Columns, RowSizes, ColumnSizes, Row, Column, RowSpan and ColumnSpan.
Absolute X/Y positioning and associated coordinate modes.
Typography, colour, background, borders, corner radii, opacity, clipping, transforms, shadows/effects and other applicable mature property families.
Numeric layout units MUST be typed. Bare fixed dimensions use CUI logical/DPI-aware pixels unless the property explicitly defines another unit. Auto, percentages and fractional/fill sizing are supported where meaningful.
ColumnSizes:1fr_2fr_200
RowSizes:Auto_1fr
Grid and stack behaviour
Container Type:Grid performs row/column layout. Container Type:Vertical_Stack and Horizontal_Stack perform ordered stack layout. CellGap controls spacing between grid/stack cells/items; CellMargin controls the per-cell/item margin contribution.
Scrolling is orthogonal to layout Type and can be enabled independently.
<Container Type:Vertical_Stack Horizontal-Scrolling:True Vertical-Scrolling:True>
Invalid layout-property combinations MUST fail at compile time when statically knowable or return a typed runtime layout error when dynamically introduced.
Absolute positioning and coordinate system
Container Type:Absolute enables free child positioning. Bare X and Y use CUI's proportional coordinate system by default and MAY be decimal values.
The centre of the positioning surface is (0,0). The normal horizontal range is -1000 at the left edge to +1000 at the right edge. The normal vertical range is -1000 at the bottom edge to +1000 at the top edge. Values outside the normal range are legal and place the reference point beyond the surface, which is useful for transitions/off-screen UI.
<Container Type:Absolute>
    <Text X:-500.5 Y:250.25>Hello</Text>
</Container>
An axis may alternatively use X-px/Y-px for CUI logical pixels or X-%/Y-% for percentage positioning. Percentage 0 is left/bottom, 50 is centre and 100 is right/top. Coordinates in every mode MAY be decimals.
An element may define only one authoritative positioning mode per axis at a time. Supplying X and X-px together, for example, is an error.
Coordinate recalibration and inherited axes
X-Inherited and Y-Inherited independently recalibrate descendant coordinate resolution to the declaring Container's bounds.
X-Inherited=True makes that Container's left/right bounds the descendant -1000/+1000 X range and the corresponding percentage/pixel reference surface.
Y-Inherited=True makes that Container's bottom/top bounds the descendant -1000/+1000 Y range and the corresponding percentage/pixel reference surface.
The nearest applicable inherited axis scope wins. X and Y may therefore resolve against different ancestor Containers. Outside an Absolute/free-positioning context, free X/Y placement is invalid unless the owning specialised Type explicitly declares support.
Layering and rendering depth
Layer is both a container element and an inheritable signed-integer property.
<Layer Layer="1">...</Layer>
<Layer:2>...</Layer>
<Text Layer="5">Hello</Text>
Higher Layer values render/hit-test above lower values; negative and positive values are valid. An element-level Layer overrides the parent layer and becomes the inherited layer for its normal descendants unless they override it again. Equal layers use normal tree/source order, with the later item above the earlier item where they overlap.
Layer controls depth only; it does not by itself imply modal behaviour or layout.
Modal behaviour
Modal is a separate property. Modal=True traps applicable focus/input inside the modal subtree and blocks lower-layer interaction in the same render surface until dismissal. Nonmodal high-layer popups may sit above content without blocking unrelated lower-layer interaction outside their bounds.
Anchor and runtime placement
Anchor is an optional named placement point, not a prerequisite for loading a Prefab or dynamically created UI.
<Anchor::bob>
Runtime placement MUST support at least:
LoadAt(anchor) — place at an Anchor.
LoadAt(x,y) — fixed proportional coordinates in the selected/current Absolute coordinate scope.
LoadAtPixels(x,y) and LoadAtPercent(x,y).
LoadUnder(element), LoadAbove(element), LoadLeftOf(element) and LoadRightOf(element).
LoadIn(grid,row,column, optional spans/alignment).
LoadInto(container).
Relative placement operations such as LoadUnder, LoadAbove, LoadAt(anchor) and LoadIn(grid,...) remain live placement relationships and track target movement/resizing. Raw coordinate placement is fixed in the chosen coordinate scope unless the caller changes it.
When multiple Prefabs/UI instances are loaded at the same Anchor without another placement rule, they flow downward from that Anchor in load order. Raw repeated coordinate loads overlap unless another rule is supplied.
Style and property precedence
Effective presentation MUST resolve deterministically in the following order from lowest to highest precedence:
CUI built-in property default.
Inherited Theme.
element Type/(Definition) default.
explicit instance property.
scoped <$Property> region.
active Style/event overlay.
A direct runtime property assignment changes the stored explicit property value at its normal level; it is not an invisible new top-level precedence layer. If a temporary event Style currently overrides that property, the new stored value becomes visible when the temporary overlay ends.
Style rules and ActionEvent
Action events use the long form <ActionEvent Type="..."> or & shorthand.
<&Hover>
<&Clicked>
<&PointerEnter>
<&PointerExit>
Inside a Style, an ActionEvent begins a rule and following property/action declarations belong to that event until the next ActionEvent or the end of the Style. A property declaration before any event is an unconditional Style property while that Style is active.
<Style>
    <&Hover{::button}>
    <$Color:Pink{::label}>
    <$Background:Black{::label}>
</Style>
Event target syntax
Curly braces declare an explicit target. {::foo} targets ID foo; {:::foo} targets Group foo. TargetID and TargetGroup are the verbose equivalent attributes.
<&Hover{::greenText}>
<&Hover TargetID="greenText">
<$Color:Pink{:::labels}>
<$Color:Pink TargetGroup="labels">
When an event/property declaration is owned by an element/Style and no explicit target is provided, it targets the owning element/context according to that construct's standard rule.
Temporary versus Once events
Stateful events such as Hover apply their associated Style overlay only while the state is active; ending Hover automatically reveals the previously effective values. OnceHover commits the resulting mutation so it remains after Hover ends.
The same temporary-versus-committed distinction applies to corresponding event families such as Clicked/OnceClick, Loaded/OnceLoaded and Deactivated/OnceDeactivated where meaningful. Once-prefixed events may execute on later qualifying occurrences; 'Once' denotes committed effect semantics, not a one-time lifetime subscription.
Event source, propagation and cancellation
Events target the actual originating element by default and do not automatically bubble through every parent. Bubble=True enables supported upward propagation.
Event context MUST expose at least Event.Source, Event.Target, Event.Type and applicable Event.Value. For a Group trigger, Event.Source identifies the particular Group member that generated the event, enabling a single Group rule to affect only that member when desired.
Event.Cancel() cancels further compatible propagation/action when the event family permits cancellation.
Typed actions and asynchronous work
ActionEvent MAY invoke a named typed application/domain action in addition to Style/property changes. UI actions MUST converge on the same domain operations used by the app's API/Automation surface where an equivalent operation exists; CUI MUST NOT become a parallel private business-logic layer.
<&Clicked{::SaveButton} Action:SaveDocument>
Long-running/async actions MUST NOT block the UI thread and must expose typed running/completed/failed/cancelled state/events usable by CUI.
Input and two-way value flow
Displaying a variable is one-way by default. Writable Input properties bind two-way by default when the source is writable and the conversion is valid.
<Input Type:Text Value=<:Name:>>
<Input Type:Checkbox Checked=<:Enabled:>>
<Input Type:Slider Value=<:Volume:>>
WriteBack=False disables automatic source update. A :static reference is snapshot-only and has no automatic write-back.
When typed conversion fails during input, the control retains the invalid entered representation and exposes validation error state; the source variable is not overwritten until conversion succeeds.
Conditional UI
CUI MUST provide structural conditional composition.
<If Condition=<:LoggedIn:>>
    ...
</If>
<Else>
    ...
</Else>
Condition is live by default. When the condition changes, the applicable branch is instantiated and the other branch is removed from the structural tree. A static condition reevaluates only on explicit containing-scope refresh.
Structural removal is stronger than Active inheritance: an ActiveIndependently child cannot remain alive after the entire conditional branch that owns it ceases to exist.
Repeated UI
Repeat creates one generated UI instance per source item and MUST preserve item identity across live collection additions/removals/reordering.
<Repeat Source=<:Users:> As:user Key=<:user.ID:>>
    <Text><:user.Name:></Text>
</Repeat>
Key may be omitted only when each item exposes an unambiguous stable ID. A live Repeat without stable identity MUST fail rather than recreate items with ambiguous state transfer. The iteration variable exists only inside its Repeat instance.
Property catalogue and transform support
The CUI property registry MUST include mature CSS/Avalonia-like visual properties and transforms rather than limiting authors to basic colours and dimensions.
At minimum, applicable registered properties include:
Rotate, Scale, ScaleX, ScaleY, Skew, SkewX, SkewY, Translate, TranslateX and TranslateY.
Opacity, Background, Foreground/Color, Border, BorderColor, BorderWidth, CornerRadius, Shadow, Clip and Effect.
Typography, text alignment/wrapping, layout sizing/alignment, scrolling, cursor/input/focus and accessibility properties.
Animation and animation-control properties.
Properties remain strongly typed. Unknown/incompatible property names or values are compiler errors when statically knowable.
Effect versus Background backdrop processing
Effect and Background modifier chains have different targets.
Effect processes the element's own rendered appearance. Effect:Blur(1), for example, blurs that element.
Background modifier chains process only the live rendered appearance of content behind the element as seen through the element's background region. They MUST NOT mutate, rotate, recolour, blur, move, restyle or otherwise change the actual underlying elements, their layout, hitboxes, state, events, Layer or accessibility tree.
Backdrop processing is live, not a captured fake snapshot. If content behind the background changes because of user interaction, variable updates, animation, video, scrolling, layout or any other render change, the appearance seen through the Background MUST update automatically without calling Refresh(). The compositor MAY cache safely but must invalidate affected backdrop dependencies correctly.
A fully transparent background exposes the processed backdrop directly; a semi-transparent colour/material composites over the processed backdrop; a fully opaque result may make the backdrop invisible and may be optimised away when observationally equivalent.
Blur, Refract and chained backdrop modifiers
Gaussian blur is built in.
Effect:Blur(1)
Background:Blur(1).Red
Blur uses a ratio by default: Blur(1) is equivalent to Blur(100%), Blur(0.5) to Blur(50%). The renderer maps the public ratio to the platform blur implementation deterministically.
Refract is a built-in live backdrop modifier that refracts/distorts content behind the Background, enabling liquid-glass-like materials.
Background:Refract(1).Blur(1).Color(Green).Red
Backdrop modifiers are evaluated left-to-right. Visual properties with a defined backdrop-rendering interpretation may participate as modifiers. For example:
Background:Refract(1).Blur(1).Color(Green).Rotate(30deg).Red
In the example above, only the sampled live backdrop appearance inside the Background is refracted, blurred, colour-treated and rotated; the underlying elements themselves remain unchanged. A property with no meaningful/registered backdrop interpretation MUST produce a typed compiler/runtime error rather than being silently ignored.
Gradients
Gradient is a first-class property value/modifier.
Gradient(Linear),Red(10%),Blue(20%),Green(70%)
Gradient(Linear),Red,Blue,Green
Gradient(Linear).Red, Blue, Green
Explicit stop percentages define stop positions. When stops omit positions, they are distributed evenly. Radial and other registered gradient forms are supported through the same Gradient(Type) model. Stop positions MUST be deterministic and validated; duplicate positions MAY be used for hard transitions where supported.
Animation and Keyframes
Animation is the canonical property used to apply a named animation.
<Button Animation:ShinyButton>
Named animations are declared using @ shorthand or Keyframe long form.
<@ShinyButton>
<Keyframe Name="ShinyButton">
Keyframe positions may be percentages or absolute time in milliseconds.
<$10%>
<$1000>
<$1000> means 1000 milliseconds / one second. Explicit ms/s duration syntax is also supported. Percentage keyframes require a declared/inferable Animation duration; absolute-time keyframes may infer total duration from the greatest absolute keyframe when no longer Duration is declared.
Keyframe bodies contain ordinary typed property declarations. Animatable/interpolatable property types interpolate between frames; non-interpolatable properties switch at the relevant frame boundary.
Animation control properties MUST cover at least Duration, Delay, Easing, Repeat/iteration, direction/playback and reduced-motion behaviour. The exact property registry is versioned with CUI.
Assigning/changing Animation while an element is active starts/restarts it according to its playback properties. An animation applied by a temporary Style follows that Style's lifetime unless its action explicitly commits/persists animation state.
Theme, Definition and property interaction
Theme defaults, Type/Definition defaults, explicit properties, property regions, Styles, animations and runtime changes MUST all resolve through the same registered CUI property system. There MUST NOT be separate incompatible colour/layout/transform implementations for each syntax.
Theme changes at runtime MUST invalidate only affected presentation state and preserve canonical app/domain state.
Runtime loading and element methods
Named/ID-addressable elements expose generated typed runtime handles. Runtime APIs MUST provide property mutation plus lifecycle/content operations including Active(...), Refresh(), Text/Children Replace/Add and placement/load functions where supported.
Runtime calls and markup directives MUST converge on the same underlying CUI property/lifecycle/action operations so behaviour does not depend on how a mutation was initiated.
Imports and project file discovery
The CUI toolchain automatically indexes supported local .cui, .cui-theme and .cui-prefab files within the declared project/source roots. External/shared packages use Import.
<Import Source:"package/path">
Ambiguous symbols from multiple imports MUST fail until disambiguated, including by an explicit alias such as As:SharedUI. Circular Definition/Prefab import dependencies are rejected.
Accessibility, focus and keyboard semantics
CUI MUST make accessible behaviour the default. Interactive built-ins provide appropriate semantic roles, focusability and keyboard behaviour unless explicitly overridden for a valid reason.
Framework accessibility/focus properties include:
AccessibleName and AccessibleDescription.
Role.
TabIndex and Focusable.
Shortcut and focus-state presentation.
Focus order follows semantic/tree/layout order unless explicitly overridden. Inactive elements cannot receive user focus. Hidden-but-interactive controls are technically representable under CUI's Hidden semantics, but first-party accessibility lint MUST reject invisible focusable/interactive constructs unless an explicit justified accessibility contract is supplied.
Reduced motion, high contrast, scaling/zoom and non-colour-only state communication MUST be framework-level capabilities rather than app-specific reinventions.
Localisation and directionality
CUI MUST support resource-backed/localisable user-visible strings, locale-aware number/date formatting and right-to-left directionality. Direction/layout mirroring is framework-managed where applicable. Literal developer/debug strings MAY remain literal; shipping product copy SHOULD use the localisation/resource system.
Security and dynamic CUI
First-party compiled .cui, Plugin CUI and Generative UI are different trust classes.
Compiled first-party CUI may reference its declared application contracts.
Plugin/external CUI surfaces execute inside their declared/authorised host capability environment and do not gain action permissions merely by rendering controls.
Generative UI is structured data rendered through approved CUI components/actions and MUST NOT become arbitrary trusted .cui/C# execution.
Dynamic Children strings are parsed as CUI only when the caller intentionally uses Children. User/external text should normally use Text or an explicit AddText-equivalent. Dynamic markup MUST be constrained to registered/authorised elements, properties, variables and actions of the current host.
Error boundaries and failure behaviour
Static syntax/type/property/binding errors are build/compile errors with file, line and column diagnostics and, where safe, suggested corrections.
Runtime failures from dynamic CUI, plugin content, specialised Object hosts, data or async actions MUST be isolated at the nearest declared/default error boundary where feasible so one failed component does not unnecessarily destroy the entire window/application.
An invalid dynamic CUI update must preserve the last valid tree/content. Unknown incompatible compiled CUI/runtime versions fail with a structured compatibility error.
Hot reload and developer tooling
CUI tooling MUST include compiler/build integration, formatter, linter, hot reload, component/Prefab preview, semantic tree inspector, accessibility inspector, binding/variable dependency inspection, Theme/resource inspection and rendering/performance diagnostics.
Hot reload preserves the current valid runtime tree when edited CUI is invalid. Once valid again, compatible nodes are patched while preserving state by stable IDs where unambiguous. Definition/Theme/Prefab changes update compatible live instances without arbitrarily resetting unrelated runtime state.
Testing and semantic selectors
CUI MUST expose a semantic test/accessibility tree so automated tests can locate elements by ID, role, accessible name and other stable semantic selectors rather than raw screen coordinates when semantic targeting exists.
The test harness MUST be able to render a CUI Page/Prefab at declared dimensions, Theme, scale, accessibility/reduced-motion settings and platform capability profile; interact through semantic input; inspect resulting state; and capture deterministic visual evidence where applicable.
Performance and rendering
CUI MUST use Avalonia's mature low-level rendering/composition foundations while adding CUI-level invalidation, dependency and component semantics without introducing unnecessary full-tree work.
Live variable changes invalidate only dependent expressions/properties/subtrees.
Virtualisable lists/grids/trees MUST use framework virtualisation rather than constructing every off-screen item by default.
Backdrop Blur/Refract/Gradient processing MAY use compositor caching, but cache invalidation MUST remain live and correct when sampled content changes.
Animation/input loops MUST avoid blocking application/domain work on the UI thread.
Caches must be bounded and revision/dependency invalidated.
Performance acceptance requires measured evidence on the declared supported-hardware/platform baseline. 'Looks fast' is not sufficient.
Platform and Home runtime integration
Native CUI applications depend on the compatible Home-managed CUI/shared runtime under the global Home runtime-dependency contract. The CUI compiler/toolchain belongs to the development/build environment; the runtime version/capability requirement is recorded in app/package metadata.
Web CUI MAY use a browser-specific implementation/runtime, but it MUST preserve the same public CUI semantics, component contracts, state identities and supported action/property behaviour except for explicitly declared platform capability differences.
Platform differences such as unsupported backdrop effects, specialised renderer capabilities or input hardware MUST be capability-negotiated explicitly. The runtime MUST NOT silently reinterpret unsupported CUI into materially different behaviour.
Language/runtime versioning
Compiled CUI output MUST record at least CUI language version, CUI runtime ABI/component-registry version and required capability set. Breaking language/runtime changes require migration tooling or explicit compatibility handling.
Custom distributed Themes/Prefabs/packages SHOULD carry their own version/dependency metadata. Missing/incompatible package versions surface as structured build/runtime dependency errors.
CUI compiler pipeline
The canonical pipeline is parse -> shorthand normalization -> symbol/import resolution -> Definition/Prefab/Theme expansion metadata -> typed property/variable/action validation -> accessibility/static lint -> dependency graph generation -> compiled CUI representation/source maps -> runtime binding.
The compiler MUST NOT silently accept unknown attributes/tags/types/events/properties. Typographical mistakes such as Type:Vertcal_Stack SHOULD produce an unknown-symbol error with an unambiguous suggestion such as Vertical Stack when available.
Acceptance criteria
CUI is implementation-complete only when real compiled/runtime behaviour proves the agreed language and framework semantics. Source presence, parsing a toy file or rendering a static Button is insufficient.
Release validation MUST demonstrate at minimum:
A real app surface authored only in .cui with .axaml/.hui rejected as app markup while using the pinned Avalonia fork underneath.
Fixed core elements, Container Grid/Vertical Stack/Horizontal Stack/Absolute Types, scrolling and mature layout properties.
Colon attribute shorthand, underscore-to-space shorthand, comments, strict ambiguity detection and explicit quoted disambiguation.
(Definition) custom elements and Types plus built-in/custom inherited Themes including Professional, Glow, Playful, Bubble and Cinematic.
Static and dynamic Prefabs loaded in multiple hosts, proving shared versus per-instance internal state.
Live/default and static variable references, typed conversion forms and Live(x,y) dependency relationships without per-frame polling.
ID/Name aliases, :: ID shorthand, ::: Group shorthand, scoped Prefab IDs/Groups and deterministic cross-scope access.
Property long form, $ shorthand, property IDs/Groups, inferred single-property Group mutation and mandatory explicit property selection for multi-property Groups.
Text versus Children semantics, Replace/Add and rollback on invalid dynamic child markup.
Active, Hidden, Interactive and !/ActiveIndependently lifecycle semantics including restoration of stored state.
Layer tag/property with positive/negative values, element override, same-layer ordering and separate Modal behaviour.
Absolute decimal ratio coordinates, x/y pixel and percent modes, X-Inherited/Y-Inherited recalibration and nested independent axis scopes.
Prefab/UI placement at Anchor, raw coordinates, pixels, percentages, above/below/left/right of elements and Grid positions, including live relative tracking.
Style rules with Hover/OnceHover, Clicked/OnceClick, Loaded/OnceLoaded and Deactivated/OnceDeactivated plus TargetID/TargetGroup and {::}/{:::} shorthand.
Event.Source for Group triggers, opt-in bubbling/cancellation and typed async action invocation.
Conditional If/Else and identity-preserving Repeat over live collections.
Two-way Input write-back with conversion/validation failure handling.
Rotate/Scale/Skew/Translate and representative CSS/Avalonia-like visual/layout properties through the common typed registry.
Element Effect:Blur and live Background:Blur/Refract modifier chains proving that underlying elements remain semantically/visually unchanged outside the backdrop view.
A backdrop over changing/animated/video content updates live without Refresh().
Linear and Radial gradients with explicit and evenly distributed stops.
Named Animation: application using <@Name>/<Keyframe Name=...>, percentage and millisecond keyframes, interpolation, easing/repeat and reduced-motion handling.
Hot reload preserving the last valid UI and stable state across compatible updates.
Keyboard-only operation, screen-reader semantics, high-contrast/reduced-motion/scaling and accessibility lint.
Semantic UI automation/test selection without coordinate clicking when IDs/roles are available.
Native and web/platform capability negotiation plus language/runtime version mismatch handling.
Any implementation that recreates CUI as an AXAML preprocessor, uses polling for ordinary live variables, treats Hidden as unloaded, treats Active as destructive property reset, mutates underlying elements through Background backdrop modifiers, snapshots Blur/Refract instead of keeping them live, silently guesses ambiguous shorthand, partially applies incompatible Group mutations, or exposes unreviewed donor/property capability gaps MUST fail release conformance.
Apps
Home runtime dependency
Every installable/native 9to1 app has a hard runtime dependency on 9-1 Home. Before initialising the app’s normal UI or opening user artifacts, the app MUST complete a local Home availability/version handshake against the Home-managed shared services it requires.
If Home is not installed, the app MUST refuse normal startup and display only a minimal bootstrap surface explaining that 9-1 Home is required. The bootstrap surface MUST provide an Install Home action that opens/starts the trusted Home installation flow. It MUST NOT create or mutate normal app data while Home is absent.
If Home is installed but the required shared service/API version is missing, incompatible or damaged, the app MUST refuse unsafe normal startup and offer the appropriate Home update/repair flow with a structured reason. Apps MUST NOT silently launch private replacement services to bypass the missing Home dependency.
This local-install dependency applies to native/installable clients. Browser-hosted web surfaces cannot require a local Home installation; they instead use the corresponding authenticated 9to1 shared web services and capability negotiation defined for web clients.
Home owns shared platform services including the permission broker, shared Dulche broker/runtime coordination, package/update metadata and the Shared Productivity Engine defined in the Home section.
Persistent contextual AI bar
Every interactive 9to1 app MUST expose the shared persistent floating contextual AI bar at the bottom of its primary content surface. The bar uses Dulche plus the owning app's authorised semantic state. It MUST be able to inspect the current artifact/surface semantically and, when permitted, edit it through the owning app's typed APIs. The bar is not limited to whatever pixels happen to be visible in the viewport.
The shared bar MUST expose an explicit persistent AI access-mode switcher with at least Read-only and Write mode. The current mode MUST remain visible enough that the user can tell whether Dulche may only inspect the surface or may also request mutations. This switcher is a platform-wide interaction contract used consistently by Write, Present, Boards, Files, Canvas, Data, Mail, Planner and every other surface that hosts the shared bar.
In Read-only mode, Dulche MAY read, search, compare, reason over, summarise, explain and navigate the full authorised semantic surface, including off-screen content that the owning app exposes. It MAY generate proposed changes in conversation, but MUST NOT mutate the owning artifact, structure or app state. Read-only access does not imply permission to inspect data outside the caller's normal authorisation boundary.
In Write mode, Dulche receives the same semantic read context plus the owning app's permitted typed mutation actions. Write mode is capability to request/perform edits, not permission to bypass app state, trust, confirmation, review, external-side-effect or security rules. Mutations MUST use stable semantic identities such as ArtifactID, PageID, SectionID, ObjectID, row/range/entity IDs or equivalent domain identifiers and the owning app's normal revision/conflict semantics.
The AI-bar mode is separate from the host app's own Edit/View/Suggest/Locked/Unlocked or equivalent state. For example, an AI bar in Write mode does not silently bypass a Board that is currently in View mode, and a Write document in Suggest mode represents permitted AI edits as suggestions rather than accepted direct edits. Host-surface rules may narrow the effective mutation set further.
Apps MUST provide a permission-filtered semantic context snapshot including the active artifact/page/entity, current selection, relevant stable object IDs, structure necessary to understand the task, current revision/state and supported typed actions. The bar MUST prefer this semantic context over screenshot/OCR/pixel interpretation and MUST NOT substitute raw mouse/keyboard/desktop automation when typed context/actions exist.
The AI bar MUST remain visually separate from document/page content and MUST NOT change the underlying artifact layout merely by being shown. It MAY collapse to a compact state but MUST remain directly reachable without navigating to a separate AI page. Read/Write mode changes the AI's effective capability only; it does not create a second copy of the current artifact.
Surface-specific mutation protections MAY be stricter than the shared Write-mode baseline and cannot be weakened by AI mode or trust state. Data is the mandatory example: every AI-requested Data mutation requires explicit approval for that specific action even while the bar is in Write mode. When the target is a live database, Data MUST additionally show a meaningful preview/diff, validate the operation and create a recoverable backup/snapshot/checkpoint before execution. If the required live-database backup cannot be created, the mutation MUST NOT proceed as though rollback exists.
For Data live-database changes, the approval surface SHOULD identify the intended operation, affected tables/entities/rows where knowable, schema/dependency impact, external side effects and backup identity. Execution MUST occur only after approval, then verify the actual result and preserve rollback/recovery information. Prior approval, Accept and Trust or Always Trust MUST NOT suppress this Data-specific per-action approval invariant.
Equivalent bar actions MUST behave consistently across product surfaces, while menus and available operations remain context-sensitive to the owning app. Unsupported or inapplicable actions MUST not be exposed merely to make the bar look feature-complete.
Chat bar — expanded-mode formatting and emoji controls
Visibility and placement: Show the following buttons inline next to the plus (+) button only when the chat bar is both focused and in its expanded composer layout, with the text-entry area above the bottom controls. These buttons must not appear in compact/mini mode, even when the compact/mini chat bar is focused.
Format (Aa): Opens a floating toolbar containing Markdown formatting options, including bold and italics.
Emojis (😀): Opens a CUI emoji picker.
Chat-bar control acceptance
Verify that Aa and the emoji button appear beside + only while the expanded composer is focused; neither appears in compact/mini mode. The formatting toolbar and CUI emoji picker MUST work with keyboard input, labelled controls, focus return and preserved draft/selection state.
Cross-app invocation and compose contract
Every interactive 9to1 app that hosts the shared persistent AI bar MUST use Home's canonical compose invocation component and cross-app dispatcher. Plugins, Skills, Apps, Agents, Files and the reserved @Computer Use capability MUST therefore resolve consistently across apps rather than each product implementing a private @ syntax or resource picker.
A model may cross an app boundary only when that action is authorised by user intent: explicit @ invocation, an explicit instruction naming the target capability/app, or an unambiguous requested outcome whose canonical owner is another 9to1 app. Implied intent is semantic, not opportunistic; unrelated app access remains out of scope.
When a target 9to1 app owns the requested artifact/action, the originating model MUST use the target app's typed API/shared semantic action contract and MAY ask Home to launch/reveal the target app so the user can observe progress. For example, a request to create a presentation routes to Present and creates/edits a canonical Present artifact rather than fabricating a slide-like object in the originating app.
Computer Use MUST NOT be selected automatically as a fallback when typed app execution is unavailable, inconvenient or fails. It is usable only after explicit @Computer Use invocation and remains subject to the Computer Use eligibility, permission, game-exclusion and Autoreview rules.
Model-driven typed edits MAY be visualised in the target app with live object motion, selection highlights, text insertion and a synthetic/virtual cursor. This visualisation is not evidence that Dulche is literally controlling the pointer; the typed action/result remains authoritative and the synthetic cursor MUST be visually distinguishable from the user's actual input cursor.
Launch Screens
A launch/home screen is the app’s start surface: the equivalent of the modern Microsoft Word start page shown in the reference image, not simply an empty editor or project view. It appears when the app is opened without an existing artifact/session to restore, and whenever the user deliberately returns to the app’s Home/start surface.
For every app listed below, the launch screen MUST implement each capability in the following list when that capability exists for the product. If a capability is not applicable, the product section MUST explicitly state the exclusion and reason rather than silently omit it:
Create a blank document/project/artifact.
Templates, starter projects and a way to browse more templates where the app supports them.
Recent items, with useful location/path and modified-state information.
Favourites/pinned items.
Shared with Me or equivalent collaborative content where applicable.
Search across the app’s relevant files/projects.
Open/import entry points for existing files/projects and supported external formats.
The launch screen must use CUI and the app’s real storage/project model. Recent, favourite, shared and template entries must be functional data-backed surfaces rather than static mock content. Apps may add app-specific quick actions, onboarding/tours or account/storage indicators where useful.
The following apps must include a launch/home screen:
Write
Present
Data
Canvas
Boards
Picture
Wave
Motion
Forms
AI Studio
Web Apps
Cakemods.com MUST host a web version of every 9-1 Workspace/AI product that is not explicitly listed as web-exempt. Web surfaces MUST share the same CAKE ID identity, canonical artifact formats, domain APIs, permission model and underlying server-side entities as desktop equivalents. Browser-specific UI/layout MAY differ, but it MUST NOT create a separate incompatible product model.
The default rule is to provide a web version whenever the product’s core value can sensibly work in a browser. Browser-specific capability limits are acceptable when they are explicit and the useful core product remains intact; a single desktop-only feature is not by itself a reason to omit an otherwise useful web app.
Web exemption is permitted only when the product’s core function requires infrastructure, privileged device access or hosted compute that CAKE does not currently provide. Each exemption MUST state the blocking capability/infrastructure. Exemptions MUST be re-evaluated when that blocker is removed; exemption is not a permanent product classification.
Current exemption:
Mini Computer — a useful web version would require hosted virtualisation/server compute that CAKE does not currently have capacity to provide.
Mini Computer may gain a hosted web mode in the future as a 9to1 subscription capability if sufficient server compute is available. The same principle applies to future apps whose meaningful web implementation requires paid hosted compute.
Accounts & Subscription
CAKE ID and authentication
CAKE ID is the shared identity used across CAKE and 9to1. A normal CAKE ID is separate from a WordPress user account; WordPress may remain linked for site administration, but ordinary 9to1 users must not need WordPress accounts.
9to1 web apps authenticate against CAKEMODS/CAKE ID using a browser-based OAuth 2.0 Authorization Code flow with PKCE or an equivalent secure public-client flow. Desktop, web and open-source/custom clients are treated as untrusted public clients: they receive short-lived user access tokens and never contain provider keys, billing secrets or entitlement-signing secrets.
The server is authoritative for account state, sessions, entitlements, organisation policy, Dust, storage/site quotas, billing and provider credentials. A modified or self-built client can change its own interface or features but cannot grant itself paid entitlements, bypass quotas or mint trusted usage.
Authentication/session operations must support account sign-in/sign-out, current-user/profile lookup, active-session/device inspection and revocation. Sensitive account or billing changes use trusted CAKEMODS web flows rather than accepting raw payment credentials through the open-source client.
Profiles — customisation and Jacob's reserved account
Profile customisation MUST include changing the display name and username through the profile/account UI and equivalent authorised APIs. Username availability, uniqueness and reservation checks MUST apply consistently across UI, APIs, registration and rename flows. Changes MUST preserve the canonical CAKE ID/UserID, ownership, history, permissions and entitlements; mutable names MUST NOT become identity or authorisation keys.
The exact handle @CroakyJake MUST be reserved exclusively for Jacob. Registration and rename flows MUST prevent other accounts from claiming it, including case variants that would bypass the reservation. The reservation MUST be bound through trusted provisioning to Jacob's verified canonical account ID, not awarded to whichever account first requests that text. Production identifiers MUST be verified rather than guessed.
Jacob's verified account MUST automatically receive all Business features free of charge, including subsequently added Business features, without requiring a paid Business subscription. This is an account-bound entitlement: changing a display name or username MUST NOT grant it to another person or remove it from Jacob. Reservation and entitlement administration MUST be privileged, auditable operations, separate from ordinary profile editing. Free Business access does not bypass security permissions or authorise third-party spending.
Profile customisation — required and optional fields
The profile editor MUST include the following fields. An asterisk (*) denotes a required field; only Name and Username are required within this field set.
Name* — REQUIRED. The user's profile/display name, extending the existing display-name customisation requirement.
Username* — REQUIRED. The user's account handle, subject to the existing availability, uniqueness and reservation rules.
Icon — OPTIONAL. The user's profile icon, which the user can add, change or remove.
Pronouns — OPTIONAL. User-provided pronouns, which the user can add, change or clear.
Job — OPTIONAL. The user's job/job title. This field is especially relevant in a Business context but MUST also be available to ordinary personal users; it MUST NOT be Business-only or mandatory for Business users.
The UI MUST visibly mark Name and Username with an asterisk and explain that * denotes required. Icon, Pronouns and Job MUST be allowed to remain unset and to be cleared without preventing an otherwise valid profile from being saved. Name and Username MUST NOT be saved as empty or whitespace-only values. Optional personal information MUST NOT be inferred or populated without the user's input.
The equivalent authorised profile APIs MUST expose the same five fields and apply the same required/optional validation rules. Partial updates MUST preserve fields omitted from the request rather than clearing them. Existing canonical account identity, ownership, permissions, username reservation and account-bound Business entitlement requirements remain unchanged, including Jacob's reserved @CroakyJake handle and free Business features.
Acceptance MUST verify that a profile can be saved with valid Name and Username while Icon, Pronouns and Job are unset; all three optional fields can subsequently be added, changed and cleared; Job is available to both personal and Business users without becoming required; blank required fields produce validation errors; and equivalent authorised API operations preserve the same behaviour and account identity.
Profile API, provisioning and acceptance
Extend the existing account/profile APIs for profile reads and partial updates, icon management and username availability. Reservation and account-bound Business-entitlement provisioning MUST remain privileged, auditable operations. APIs MUST expose the same validation as the UI, preserve omitted fields and return structured conflicts or validation failures. Ordinary clients MUST NOT self-grant Business access. Test rename without identity or ownership loss, rejected unauthorised @CroakyJake claims and case variants, and automatic free Business access for Jacob’s verified account only; security permissions and third-party spending approvals still apply.
Subscription model
9to1 uses a preset-first subscription model with optional customisation. Subscription state has two separate dimensions: price-threshold entitlements and resource configuration. The two MUST be stored and evaluated independently.
Price-threshold entitlements determine which feature/model/site capabilities the account unlocks as its canonical configured monthly price crosses defined thresholds. Resource configuration determines the account’s allocated quantities, including AI Dust, storage, hosted-site capacity and other metered resources.
Named plans Free, Boost, Plus, Pro, Ultra, Ultra+ and Max serve both as threshold names and as preset configuration names. Their canonical ascending PlanLevel order is Free = 0, Boost = 1, Plus = 2, Pro = 3, Ultra = 4, Ultra+ = 5 and Max = 6. APIs, billing logic and entitlement checks MUST use stable PlanID/PlanLevel rather than inferring ordering from display names. A preset is a convenience starting configuration; the preset label MUST NOT be treated as the sole source of entitlement truth.
Local models and core local tools are not metered through cloud AI Dust. The Free configuration MUST retain useful local/core functionality while cloud AI, hosted storage/sites and other server-funded resources remain subject to server-authoritative entitlements and quotas.
Price thresholds
Let EntitlementPriceMonthly be the canonical monthly price assigned by the subscription backend to the account’s current configuration. The backend MUST compute effective threshold entitlements from this value; clients MUST NOT infer them from the displayed preset name.
Thresholds are cumulative. For every threshold T where EntitlementPriceMonthly >= T.Price, all entitlements defined by T are added to the account’s effective entitlement set. Therefore a Max-priced configuration also receives all lower-threshold grants, including Ultra grants, unless a future threshold explicitly defines a non-cumulative exception.
Selecting a preset does not bypass threshold evaluation. If a user customises a preset and the resulting configured price crosses a different threshold, the backend MUST recalculate the effective threshold set from the resulting EntitlementPriceMonthly.
The currently defined commercial thresholds are:
Free — £0/month. Unlocks access to select free cloud models and unlimited local/core tools.
Boost — £7.99/month. Entry paid cloud-AI tier. It unlocks CAKE-funded cloud models within the Boost model-cost band, benchmarked against Luna-class pricing rather than tied to one specific named model.
Plus — £19.99/month. Adds a materially larger cloud-AI/resource allowance than Boost while retaining access to the Boost model-cost band and any other models priced within that effective band. Plus exists as the regular-use tier between Boost and Pro.
Pro — £34.99/month. Adds a higher CAKE-funded model-cost band benchmarked against Sol-class pricing, while retaining all lower-band model access. Pro also permits materially higher cloud-AI, storage and hosted-site allocations than Plus.
Ultra — £69.99/month. Adds the highest standard CAKE-funded model-cost band, benchmarked against Astra-class pricing, while retaining all lower-band model access.
Ultra+ — £99.99/month. Retains at least the complete Ultra model-access set and enables materially larger cloud-AI, storage, hosted-site and concurrency allocations than Ultra.
Max — £149.99/month. Retains at least the complete Ultra+ model-access set and enables the highest standard preset cloud-AI, storage, hosted-site and concurrency allocations. Because thresholds are cumulative, Max-priced configurations retain every lower-threshold entitlement.
Cloud model entitlement MUST be expressed through versioned effective model-cost/capability bands rather than a permanent allow-list of model brand names. References such as Luna-class, Sol-class and Astra-class are pricing/capability benchmarks for the current commercial design, not exclusive model identities. Any CAKE-funded model whose effective provider cost and capability profile fit within the user's unlocked band may be made available, subject to provider availability, safety/privacy policy and backend configuration. Replacing a benchmark model with another comparably priced model MUST NOT require renaming the subscription tier.
OPEN: the backend still needs one canonical rule defining how temporary discounts, promotional credits, tax and non-monthly billing cadence affect EntitlementPriceMonthly. Until that rule is defined, threshold eligibility MUST be calculated only by the server and MUST NOT be reproduced locally by clients.
Preset configurations
Free, Boost, Plus, Pro, Ultra, Ultra+ and Max also exist as pre-made subscription configurations. A preset MUST define explicit resource values such as allocated AI Dust, storage allocation, hosted-site limits, concurrency/burst limits where applicable and any other metered resources supported by the subscription system.
Preset configuration and threshold entitlement state MUST remain separate server-side fields. Changing resource values MAY change the configured monthly price and therefore the unlocked threshold set, but MUST NOT mutate the canonical definition of the source preset.
A customised plan MUST retain the concrete resource values selected by the user even when those values no longer match any named preset. The UI MAY display the source preset for context, but APIs MUST return the actual resource configuration rather than reconstructing it from a tier name.
Preset definitions MUST be versioned. Existing accounts MUST retain an auditable reference to the preset version they originally selected plus subsequent customisation state. Updating a preset definition MUST NOT silently rewrite existing subscriber allocations.
Known preset requirements are now: Boost is £7.99/month with light cloud-AI usage, small hosted storage, a maximum of 1 full hosted site and 3 single-page sites; Plus is £19.99/month with materially higher cloud-AI usage and storage, a maximum of 3 full hosted sites and 5 single-page sites. Pro (£34.99), Ultra (£69.99), Ultra+ (£99.99) and Max (£149.99) MUST each provide materially more included cloud-AI usage, storage and hosted-site capacity than the preceding paid preset. Exact AI Dust/storage/site quantities above Plus are not yet fully specified and MUST NOT be invented.
Canonical subscription state
The server-authoritative subscription object MUST expose at least the following fields:
PresetID? — stable identifier of the preset used as the starting configuration, or null when no preset applies.
PresetVersion? — version of the referenced preset, or null when no preset applies.
IsCustomised — true when the current resource configuration differs from the referenced preset/version.
EntitlementPriceMonthly — canonical monthly price used for threshold evaluation.
EffectiveThresholds — ordered list/set of all currently unlocked thresholds.
EffectiveEntitlements — resolved feature/model/site entitlements after threshold, account and organisation-policy evaluation.
AIDustAllocated — allocated cloud-AI Dust for the current billing/configuration period.
StorageAllocatedBytes — storage allocation in bytes.
HostedSiteLimit — concurrent/full hosted-site allowance.
SinglePageSiteLimit — additional single-page-site allowance after threshold/resource evaluation.
AdditionalResources — versioned typed object/map for future metered resources. Clients MUST ignore unknown keys they do not understand while preserving them when round-tripping configuration.
Free hosted-site inactivity
For a Free hosted site, inactivity takes the site offline rather than deleting it. During the first 120 days the account MUST sign in at least once every 30 days to keep the free site online. After that period, the current rule requires at least one account sign-in per year. Taking a site offline MUST NOT delete its stored site data.
Custom resource allocation
The custom-plan editor includes the high-level choice “What do you want to use 9to1 for?” with these profiles:
Full Workspace (Balanced)
Prioritise AI Limits
Prioritise Storage & Sites Limits
Current £10 allocation examples are:
Balanced: 250 GB storage + 35,000 AI Dust.
AI-priority: 25 GB storage + 65,000 AI Dust.
Storage/Sites-priority: 500 GB storage + 15,000 AI Dust.
The current internal allocation baseline is £1 of plan budget = 10,000 AI Dust before commercial margin/profit. The server remains authoritative for the actual commercial conversion and account balance.
Business add-ons — pricing, seats and resource billing
Business costs an additional USD $5 per month per organisation and supports a maximum of 50 seats. Business + costs an additional USD $15 per month per organisation and has no subscription seat cap. Neither add-on has a separate per-seat fee. Purchased AI usage/credits, storage and other funded resources remain separately configured and may be pooled or allocated individually; unlimited seats do not mean unlimited resources.
Both add-ons include 9to1 Admin and the functional Business capabilities specified below. Business + includes the Business capability set; further exclusive Business + capabilities are OPEN and MUST NOT be invented from its name. Pricing displays, quotes, invoices and entitlement APIs MUST distinguish the organisation add-on, seat capacity and resource charges. A base-resource quote in another currency MUST NOT be silently relabelled as USD; the trusted billing quote must make currency/conversion explicit.
Billing state MUST store AddOnID, add-on definition version, OrgID, seat-limit value or explicit Unlimited, effective dates and applicable account-bound grants separately from user resource configurations. No client-supplied role, username or plan label can self-grant Business. The free Business entitlement for Jacob remains governed by the Profiles subsection and does not authorise paid resource purchases or third-party spending.
Changing Business + to Business with more than 50 active members MUST require a seat-remediation preview or retain a visibly constrained pending-downgrade state; it must not silently remove users or delete shared content. Add-on cancellation and billing failure MUST have explicit entitlement/recovery states. Account-level billing, export and recovery remain available through appropriate authorised routes even when normal Business editing is unavailable. Exact grace periods, proration and suspended/pending-seat accounting remain OPEN unless defined in the canonical billing policy.
Entitlements and usage API
The subscription/account layer must expose supported first-party APIs for the information and actions available to the user, following the global API-parity rule. The core surface includes:
9to1.Account.GetCurrent();
9to1.Account.GetEntitlements();
9to1.Account.ListSessions();
9to1.Account.RevokeSession(sessionID);
9to1.Account.RevokeAllOtherSessions();
9to1.Subscription.GetPlan();
9to1.Subscription.GetUsage();
9to1.Subscription.GetDustBalance();
9to1.Subscription.GetStorageUsage();
9to1.Subscription.GetSiteUsage();
9to1.Subscription.ListPresets();
9to1.Subscription.PreviewConfiguration(config);
9to1.Subscription.OpenCheckout(config);
9to1.Subscription.OpenManage();
9to1.Subscription.GetPersonalAPIStatus();
Billing-changing calls do not accept raw payment-card details. OpenCheckout/OpenManage hand off to an authenticated trusted CAKEMODS billing flow. Read APIs return the server-authoritative account state rather than trusting client-maintained counters.
Server-authoritative enforcement
All paid/cloud usage is enforced server-side. The open-source client is never the authority for remaining Dust, model access, storage, site count, billing state or quotas. Custom/forked clients use the same live account entitlements and cannot bypass limits by changing local code.
For cloud AI, the trusted gateway checks identity, organisation policy where applicable, model entitlement, hard limits and Dust before execution. Usage follows a reserve → run → settle model so concurrent requests cannot overspend the same balance. Provider keys and commercial billing logic remain server-side.
Short-lived or one-time signed capability tokens may be used internally for narrowly scoped operations, but they do not become reusable secrets embedded in applications. Server-side storage/site operations perform the same authoritative entitlement checks.
Personal API access
Accounts with at least 80,000 allocated AI Dust unlock Personal API access. Personal API usage consumes the same account Dust allowance as normal 9to1 cloud-AI usage; it is not a separate unlimited pool.
Personal API access is for the account holder’s own external integrations and workflows. It is not a public-facing resale allowance and does not grant permission to redistribute CAKE provider credentials or resell the underlying service.
Web subscription behaviour
Web and desktop clients MUST resolve account state from the same CAKE ID and entitlement service. For the same account and organisation context, plan identity, Dust balance, hosted-storage usage, site quota/usage and applicable feature entitlements MUST be consistent across official clients, subject only to explicitly documented platform capability differences.
Where a future web feature requires material hosted compute that is not available on the free/local product - for example hosted Mini Computer virtual machines - it may be offered as a subscription-backed server capability with explicit resource limits. The browser UI must never pretend that local-only or unavailable server compute exists.
Business features — functional specification
BIZ-01 — Organisation boundary and shared state
Business is an organisation collaboration and management capability set, not merely labels on pricing cards. It comprises Team Space and an organisation drive; organisation Connect; cross-account device Mesh; pooled or individually partitioned usage; team-wide Agents; and device-level policy controls for managed 9to1-OS Business accounts. 9to1 Admin supplies their management interface, while the existing apps retain canonical ownership of their domain data.
Every organisation-scoped operation MUST carry an explicit OrgID and authenticated membership/delegation context. Personal and organisation work remain separately identifiable in switchers, search, storage, AI context and billing. Joining an organisation MUST NOT merge personal files, chats, memories, devices or credentials into it. Moving/sharing personal material requires a deliberate authorised operation with destination ownership, access and billing impact shown. Leaving one organisation cannot revoke or destroy unrelated personal work or membership elsewhere.
BIZ-02 — Team Space and organisation drive
Each organisation MUST support a canonical shared Team Space backed by organisation-owned shared storage, not an independent copy of every member’s files. Space membership, role/group access, instructions, permitted models/tools and shared Agent bindings are managed through the existing Spaces model. Files, Pages, Boards and other app artifacts retain stable canonical IDs and their owning formats; references/embeds do not create silent forks.
The organisation drive MUST support folders, create/upload/open/edit where the owning app supports it, search, move/rename, version history, sharing/access review, archive/delete/recover and authorised export. Access may be assigned to organisation roles/groups or explicitly scoped members. Effective object access is checked by storage, search/indexing, previews, AI retrieval and exports, not just the Files UI. External sharing requires policy permission and explicit recipient/link scope; revocation must remove future server access and invalidate applicable derived access paths.
Shared-storage accounting MUST identify the owning organisation and charge canonical stored data once according to the storage policy rather than once per viewer. Access removal preserves organisation-owned artifacts and transfers responsibilities where necessary; it does not give administrators ownership of a departed member’s unrelated personal files. Restore/export workflows retain identity and permissions deliberately rather than accidentally republishing private content.
BIZ-03 — Organisation Connect
Connect MUST provide an organisation directory and scoped organisational groups/channels and contact endpoints, with role-controlled membership, creation and management. Where shared business identities or communication endpoints are configured, delegates act through named authorised roles with auditable attribution, not password sharing or undetectable impersonation. Inviting an external correspondent to communicate is distinct from making them an organisation seat or allocating paid usage.
Organisation communications MUST use Connect’s canonical conversations, contacts, calls and message identities. Agent email/call/text endpoints resolve to the same canonical team Agent and its permissions. External providers and device-backed transports require actual supported connections and credentials; provisioning paid endpoints needs separate approval. Membership or admin status does not create blanket permission to read private/E2EE content, export it to a model or bypass participant consent and retention controls.
BIZ-04 — Cross-account device Mesh
Business Mesh MUST allow explicitly authorised devices belonging to different organisation members to share supported compute/storage capabilities through Home/Mesh. Enrolment records MUST bind DeviceID, device/account owner, OrgID, verified trust/key material reference, supported capabilities, resource limits and grant expiry/revocation state. Organisation membership alone must not automatically pair a personal device or expose its files, GPU or network.
A resource grant MUST specify permitted consumers/workloads, CPU/GPU/memory/storage/concurrency budgets and permitted data locations. Job admission checks both requester permissions and the contributing device’s current policy. Data/secrets are scoped to the job and authorised endpoint; device contribution does not grant unrelated file, screen, microphone or personal-session access. Sensitive/local-only work cannot silently migrate to a different member’s device or a cloud provider without an authorised processing route.
Mesh MUST expose availability, queued/running jobs, utilisation, failure and cancellation/revocation outcomes. Revocation blocks new work and cancels or safely terminates existing work where supported; it must not claim to undo already completed actions or erase copies outside its actual control. A disconnected device remains unavailable/pending, never fictitiously running a workload. Windows and 9to1-OS expose only supported native capabilities; web can manage grants and observe jobs without pretending to supply privileged local resources.
BIZ-05 — Shared and individual usage pools
An organisation MUST be able to use a shared funded AI/resource pool or individually partition its purchased allocation by member/role. Partitioning is accounting over the same authoritative ledger, not duplicate credits. Store PoolID, source allocation, period, remaining/reserved/settled amounts, allocation owner and applicable policy. Member views show their effective allowance; authorised administrators can inspect aggregate and scoped consumption without exposing private work content.
Requests reserve capacity before execution and settle actual usage afterwards, releasing unused reservation according to the backend contract. The organisation total, individual ceiling and role ceiling all apply where configured. Parallel requests, retries and delayed provider reports MUST NOT spend the same balance twice. Changing pool mode preserves in-flight reservations and history and requires a validated allocation plan; insufficient funds or ambiguous settlement blocks unsafe transfer rather than inventing capacity.
Role-based rollover permission defined in Admin MUST be applied to eligible credit lots at rollover/expiry transitions and be visible in member balances. Changes preserve original lot provenance and settled charges. The product MUST distinguish rolled-over credits from newly purchased allocation and show the effective expiry. No personal balance is swept into an organisation pool merely because its owner joins; no organisation-funded balance becomes a departed member’s personal credit without an explicit supported transfer policy.
BIZ-06 — Team-wide Agents
A team Agent is a canonical Dulche Agent with organisation ownership/scope and configurable discovery, invocation, authoring and administration grants. Eligible members MUST be able to discover and invoke it from supported Spaces/app pickers and configured Connect channels without creating separate private copies. Shared configuration and approved knowledge are distinct from per-user conversations and private memories; access to one member’s context cannot leak into another member’s response.
Agent publishing/versioning, ownership transfer, required Plugins, allowed models, tool scopes, approval boundaries, schedules, budgets and concurrency limits MUST be enforced by Dulche/Home and the owning services. An Agent cannot use its owner’s wider authority to bypass the requesting member’s restrictions unless an explicit, separately authorised delegated service capability covers that operation. Persistent scheduled work records the service principal, scope and funding source and is re-evaluated on role, policy or membership changes.
Pausing, revoking or archiving a team Agent MUST stop new authorised dispatch, preserve auditable run history and report what happened to queued/running work. Sensitive credentials remain secure references; publishing an Agent is not permission to reveal them. AI Studio, Admin and runtime surfaces all edit or reference the same Agent identity and versioned definition.
BIZ-07 — Managed 9to1-OS accounts and device policy
Business MUST provide device-level administrative controls for explicitly enrolled managed 9to1-OS Business accounts. Controls MUST cover supported app/package and Plugin installation/enablement restrictions, allowed features and Automations, required organisation/role Plugins, enforced settings, default-model/routing policy and Mesh-resource participation. Existing compatibility-framework and privileged-operation restrictions continue to apply beneath every launch surface.
The OS policy agent MUST verify policy origin/version, apply only the enrolled managed scope and report Applied, Pending, Failed, Unsupported or NonCompliant status with reasons. Local UI changes, direct API calls and alternate launch paths cannot bypass enforced settings. Offline endpoints retain their last valid policy and cannot claim a newly published policy was applied without acknowledgement. Revocation and next-contact reconciliation must be explicit.
Managed account policy is not automatic whole-device ownership. Personal users, personal artifacts and unenrolled devices remain outside the organisation’s authority. Destructive remote actions, full-device wipe, arbitrary privileged shell access and surveillance are not implicitly authorised by Business. Other operating systems may expose supported Mesh and app policy, but they must not claim complete 9to1-OS endpoint-management parity without an explicit capability implementation.
BIZ-08 — Cross-app enforcement and acceptance
Permissions, policy, membership and credit changes MUST propagate through supported authoritative services and invalidate affected cached grants before further protected server actions. Published configuration, delivered configuration and acknowledged enforcement remain different states. Long-running rollout, export and reassignment use resumable jobs with per-target results. Downgrade, service outage or partial rollout must preserve data and fail closed for newly unauthorised actions.
Acceptance MUST demonstrate a shared artifact edited through two apps without forking; denied access absent from search, preview and AI context; organisation Connect without access to personal messages; explicit two-account Mesh enrolment, bounded execution and revocation; shared-pool concurrency and individual ceilings; role-dependent rollover; a team Agent that cannot leak another member’s private context; and OS restrictions enforced below UI across restart/offline/reconnect. Each feature requires equivalent authorised API coverage, persistence, accessibility, failure/recovery and actual end-to-end evidence. Inclusion on a pricing card alone is not conformance.
Apps
Workspace Apps
Home
Product role and ownership
9-1 Home is the mandatory native ecosystem hub, platform shell and control plane for installed 9to1 applications. It is not merely a dashboard application. Home owns shared platform services that must have one canonical implementation across the ecosystem: app/package management, the Home Core service registry, shared Dulche lifecycle/broker coordination, permission/trust brokerage, account/subscription state, the Shared Productivity Engine, shared model/provider configuration, Action Graph rendering, Mesh coordination, notifications, shared search/index coordination and ecosystem-wide settings.
Other apps MUST consume Home-owned shared services through supported authenticated interfaces and MUST NOT silently launch incompatible private replacements when a Home service is unavailable. App-owned documents, projects and domain data remain owned by their respective apps/storage layers; Home MUST NOT become the only canonical copy of another app’s artifacts.
Home installation includes the Home Core background service/runtime required by native apps plus the Home user-facing CUI shell. Native apps require a compatible Home installation/Home Core service, but the visible Home window does not need to remain open while other apps run. On 9to1-OS, Home Core may be integrated as a system component while preserving the same service contracts.
Home shell and navigation
The Home shell MUST be dashboard/home-oriented rather than primarily a conventional settings application. Its stable primary navigation MUST provide at least Home/Dashboard, Apps, Library, Events, Discover, Mesh and Settings. Account/profile controls MAY live in persistent shell chrome. Chat remains a Spaces destination and MUST NOT become Home’s primary landing surface.
Navigation destinations MUST preserve their own scroll/filter/selection state while the Home process remains active where practical. Deep links from notifications, Go, other apps or the OS MUST be able to open the relevant Home destination/object directly without first routing through the Dashboard.
Dashboard
The 9-1 AI Dashboard is a generative briefing/dashboard surface, not a chat landing page. It MUST assemble permission-authorised cross-app information into a concise live brief and MUST derive every surfaced tile from identifiable source entities/events or an explicitly generated synthesis over identifiable sources.
Dashboard tiles MAY surface upcoming Planner items, tasks, recent files/artifacts, project progress, reminders, travel/routes, Agent or Automation status, relevant Mail/messages, package/update state, storage/account warnings and other timely ecosystem context. Every actionable tile MUST use typed app actions; the Dashboard MUST NOT use raw UI automation to perform app mutations.
Chat remains in Spaces. The Dashboard MAY expose a lightweight ask/action affordance, but its primary purpose is synthesis, prioritisation, status and quick action.
Dashboard layout and customisation
Dashboard layout is user-configurable. The user MUST be able to add supported fixed/provider tiles, remove/hide tiles, resize tiles where the tile declares supported sizes, drag/reorder tiles, arrange tiles into the supported responsive layout, pin/lock tiles against automated movement and restore/reset a layout.
The canonical DashboardLayout MUST use stable TileInstanceID values and store at least TileType, source/provider identity, position/order, declared size, user visibility state, pinned/locked state, tile-specific configuration and layout revision. Responsive rendering MAY adapt exact pixel/grid placement to the current window/device, but it MUST preserve the user’s semantic ordering/grouping and pinned constraints.
Manual user layout changes are authoritative. Automated generation/reordering MUST NOT silently overwrite a newer manual layout revision. When a layout conflict occurs across synced devices, Home MUST preserve both revisions or resolve through an explicit revision/merge policy rather than blind last-write-wins.
AI-generated tiles and AI layout control
Dashboard settings MUST expose two independent user controls: AllowAIGeneratedTiles and AllowAIReorder. These controls are opt-in/opt-out independently; disabling one MUST NOT implicitly disable the other.
When AllowAIGeneratedTiles = false, Dulche/Generative UI MUST NOT create new arbitrary Dashboard tile instances. Existing user-added/system/provider tiles remain usable, and AI MAY still generate content inside a tile whose explicit tile contract permits generated content.
When AllowAIGeneratedTiles = true, Dulche MAY create contextually useful temporary or persisted tiles through the safe Generative UI/CUI schema. Generated tiles MUST declare provenance, the source entities/events they summarise, their lifetime/persistence policy and available typed actions. Generated tiles MUST NOT inject arbitrary executable code.
When AllowAIReorder = false, Dulche MUST NOT move, resize, regroup, reorder or hide existing tiles. When AllowAIReorder = true, Dulche MAY optimise unpinned/unlocked tile placement according to user goals/context, but MUST NOT move or resize tiles marked pinned/locked, MUST preserve explicit hidden-tile choices, and MUST retain an undoable prior layout revision.
AI layout changes MUST be attributable in Events/audit history and MUST be reversible. A user action that manually repositions or pins a tile immediately supersedes older AI layout intent for that tile.
Dashboard tile provider contract
Apps and Home services MAY register Dashboard tile providers through a versioned provider contract. A provider MUST declare TileType, source app/service, supported sizes, required permissions, refresh policy, data dependencies, available actions, whether the tile can be instantiated manually, and whether its content may be generated/modified by Dulche.
Tile data MUST remain source-backed. A tile provider that loses access to its source MUST enter an unavailable/stale state with an explanation rather than silently displaying fabricated current data. Permission revocation MUST prevent future refresh/access and purge or redact cached sensitive content according to the owning source’s policy.
Apps surface and package management
Home Apps is the primary native app catalogue and management surface. It MUST show installed and available 9to1 apps/packages with stable PackageID/AppID, name/icon, installed version, available version, update channel, installation state, dependency/compatibility state, update availability and repair/rollback availability where supported.
Home MUST support install, uninstall, update, repair, launch/open, channel/version selection where allowed and rollback to a validated previous package version where retained. Uninstalling an app MUST NOT silently delete user-created artifacts owned by that app. Artifact-retention/deletion MUST be a separate explicit operation governed by the owning app/storage semantics.
Package installation/update MUST use staged validation and atomic activation. Integrity/signature verification, dependency resolution and Home/shared-service compatibility checks MUST complete before activation. A failed activation MUST leave the previous known-good package usable when rollback data is available.
Home and Launcher MUST consume one canonical package/update database and service. Launcher is the bootstrap/outside-Home client of the same package system; it MUST NOT maintain a second incompatible installer/updater state.
Library
Library is Home’s cross-app artifact index/browser, not a duplicate Files app and not a separate storage authority. It MUST surface canonical references to authorised artifacts across 9to1 apps, including recent, favourite/pinned, shared, generated/created and app/type-filtered content where applicable.
Every Library entry MUST identify the canonical owning app, stable artifact/entity ID, display name, artifact type, relevant location/owner/share metadata and last-modified state. Opening a Library item routes to the owning app/surface and MUST NOT create a duplicate artifact merely because the item is listed in Home.
Library search/filter/sort MUST use the shared search/index service but enforce current permissions at query/open time. Revoked or deleted artifacts MUST not remain usable through stale Library entries.
Events
Events is Home’s ecosystem activity/timeline surface. It is not Planner’s calendar. Events MUST aggregate authorised typed activity from apps/services such as Agent/Automation runs, package/update events, permission/trust decisions, important artifact changes, Mesh/device events, notifications and other meaningful system activity.
Each Event MUST have a stable EventID, timestamp, source app/service, event type, actor/caller identity where relevant, object/entity references, severity/category, human-readable summary and typed deep-link/action references where available. Events MAY reference RequestID/ActionGraphID for AI/agentic activity.
Events MUST preserve source provenance and MUST NOT invent event history from generated summaries. Home MAY generate a concise natural-language digest of events, but the underlying event records remain the authority.
Discover
9-1 Discover is the model browser/discovery surface inside Home. It MUST aggregate model/catalogue information from configured providers rather than depend on one catalogue. Search, filter and comparison MUST support model identity, provider/origin, modality, capabilities, architecture/parameter information when known, context limits, quantisation/format where known, local/cloud status, hardware-fit estimate, install/connection state, entitlement/cost class and privacy/residency information.
Discover MUST treat Chat, Image and Voice as first-class model categories. Advanced discovery additionally exposes Audio and Video models. Voice MUST NOT be buried under Audio: conversational/live voice is a primary model category because it has distinct runtime, quality and capability requirements.
Voice discovery MUST expose capability metadata such as Conversational compatibility, Monologue compatibility, Live Listener compatibility, Live Translate compatibility, visual understanding, tool/action support, streaming, interruption/turn-taking support, supported languages/accents and translation language pairs when known, one-way/bidirectional/multi-language live interpretation support, local/cloud execution, latency characteristics, privacy/residency and entitlement/cost.
Discover MUST recommend the highest-quality compatible Voice models/configurations for the user's required mode and constraints. Recommendation dimensions MAY include reasoning quality, speech naturalness, speech-recognition accuracy, expressiveness, instruction following, turn-taking quality, interruption handling, long-form coherence, audio-context understanding, visual capability, tool reliability and latency. Unknown measurements remain Unknown rather than being invented.
Voice recommendations MUST be contextual rather than a single universal ranking. Discover may surface labels such as Highest quality, Best for Conversational, Best for Monologue, Best for Live Listener, Best for Live Translate, Best local and Fastest when supported by actual capability/evaluation data. Each recommendation MUST explain the relevant reasons/constraints rather than presenting an unexplained badge. Live Translate recommendations should consider speech-recognition accuracy, translation quality, output-speech quality, latency, turn detection, code-switching and multi-language support where measured.
Discover MAY recommend either a native realtime Voice Model or, where 9to1 supports it, a compatible composite voice configuration. Composite implementation detail is secondary to the normal user-facing Voice selection and MUST NOT force ordinary users to manually assemble STT/reasoning/TTS pipelines.
When a selected Voice Model exposes multiple named voices, Discover MUST show those voices as selectable variants with the underlying Voice Model as secondary metadata. Voice-quality/model recommendations and named-voice selection are distinct concepts.
A model listing MUST preserve stable provider-scoped identity even when multiple providers expose the same human-readable model name. Unknown metadata MUST remain unknown rather than being fabricated.
Discover MUST support the relevant install/pull/connect/open-in-picker action for providers that expose those capabilities. Install/connect actions route through Dulche/provider/package APIs and the normal permission/account model.
Universal Model Picker
The Universal Model Picker is the single shared model/provider selection and routing interface for the 9to1 ecosystem. On Windows/regular 9to1 it is hosted by Home; on 9to1-OS the same canonical state is surfaced by the OS. Apps, Agents and AI surfaces MUST NOT create incompatible private model pickers, provider registries or fallback logic when this shared capability applies.
Compact picker and full manager
The compact picker is used inside apps, Agents and AI surfaces when selecting the effective model/route. The full manager lives in Home/Settings → AI/Models and adds provider configuration, installation/acquisition, aliases, defaults, route ordering, background routing, fallbacks, privacy, resource and lifecycle controls.
Entries expose stable Dulche model identity plus user-facing name/alias, provider/source, local/cloud/remote state, modalities/capabilities, tool/structured-output support, reasoning controls, context/output limits, loading/availability, privacy/residency, entitlement/cost where known and local RAM/VRAM fit where meaningful. Display names are never used as canonical identity.
Simple defaults and capability categories
The normal picker keeps the primary capability configuration approachable: Chat Model/Route, Image Model/Route and Voice Model/Voice. Advanced exposes Audio Model/Route and Video Model/Route. The user may instead choose one Active Model/Route and allow all compatible capabilities to inherit it, with ordered fallback resolving unsupported capabilities.
Chat is the primary general-purpose route for conversation, reasoning, writing, coding, tool use, agentic work and multimodal chat where supported.
Image supports an explicit Inherit from Active/Chat route. Inheritance means use that ordered route and its native image-generation/editing-capable candidates; it MUST NOT silently substitute an unrelated unconfigured image provider. A dedicated Image route is an explicit override.
Voice is the first-class conversational/live-voice selection used by Vision & Voice for supported Conversational, Monologue, Live Listener and Live Translate modes. When the selected Voice Model exposes named voices, the user-facing field is labelled Voice and selects VoiceID while showing VoiceModelID as secondary metadata. When there are no named variants the field remains Voice Model.
Advanced Audio covers dedicated transcription, synthesis, audio understanding/transformation or music/audio generation where applicable. Advanced Video covers video generation, editing/transformation or video-native understanding. These category routes may inherit the Active route or use explicit independent ordered routes.
Active and Background routes
Users may configure a single Active Model/Route for all foreground AI work or assign capability-specific/app/Agent overrides. Separately, a Background Model/Route can be configured for non-interactive work such as background summarisation, indexing/classification, Background Learning processing, permitted Automations AI work, proactive suggestions and other low-priority background tasks.
If no Background route is configured, background work inherits the Active route subject to normal capability/privacy/policy filtering. A task-specific explicit model outranks Agent/app/category defaults; a configured Background route applies only to eligible background work and MUST NOT override an explicit Agent/task requirement.
Ordered Model Routes
Home/Dulche MUST support versioned ordered Model Routes shared by regular 9to1 and 9to1-OS. A Model Route is an ordered list of stable configured model identities plus per-entry enabled/disabled state and routing policy. Users can reorder candidates directly in Home, including by drag/reorder UI, without changing the models' canonical identities.
Example: an Active route may be ChatGPT 6 Sol → Gemma 4 → Fable 5. The ordering means use the highest-priority candidate that is both eligible and available for the request. The router MUST evaluate compatibility before invocation rather than deliberately sending impossible requests to higher entries first.
Foreground and background workloads may use different ordered routes. A user can therefore choose a powerful cloud model first for interactive work while using a small local model first for background work. Users who want simplicity can select a single model and leave fallback entries empty.
Eligibility-first routing
For every routed request Dulche first derives task requirements such as modality/capability, tool use, structured output, context/output requirements, reasoning support and foreground/background role. It then filters candidates against provider/model capability, privacy/locality policy, administrator policy, connection/authentication permission, user fallback policy, entitlement and other hard constraints before considering route priority.
After filtering, Dulche selects the highest-priority available candidate. A lower candidate may be used automatically when a higher candidate is unavailable because of a classified routing condition such as usage/quota exhaustion, provider/model outage, unsupported required capability, context incompatibility, authentication/provider unavailability when another authorised option exists, or local resource insufficiency after permitted reclamation.
Capability mismatch should normally be detected before invocation. For example, if the first two models in a route cannot generate video and the third can, a video-generation request routes directly to the third eligible model rather than failing through the first two.
Conditions that are not model fallback
Model fallback is not a generic retry mechanism. Errors such as missing user files, invalid tool arguments, target-app permission denial, required human approval, business-logic rejection or an external service action failure do not justify silently switching models unless the failure is independently classified as a model/provider-routing condition.
Fallback privacy and control
Each route and candidate can restrict fallback, including no fallback, local-only fallback, cloud-allowed fallback or provider-specific constraints. A route containing cloud candidates does not itself authorise sensitive context to leave the device. Privacy, administrator and task policies are evaluated before route ordering.
A request explicitly pinned to a model with fallback disabled MUST fail transparently rather than silently substitute another model. Likewise a local-only request cannot fall through to cloud merely because the local model is unavailable.
Routing transparency
The effective model and routing reason remain inspectable. Home/Dulche records route identity, selected model and skipped/fallback reasons where relevant, for example 'Sol skipped: usage exhausted; Gemma selected' or 'Sol skipped: video-generation unsupported; Fable selected'. This metadata may be surfaced subtly in normal UI and in more detail through diagnostics/Action Graph without cluttering every response.
Selection inheritance and overrides
The configuration hierarchy MUST be deterministic: request-specific explicit selection → Agent/task override → app/surface override → capability/category route → Background route for eligible background work or Active route for foreground work → configured route fallbacks. A lower-level explicit override wins, while inherited state is visibly distinguishable from an explicit override.
LLM Space and Desktop Space overrides MAY exist but remain scoped. Category overrides are independent; for example an LLM Space may override Chat while inheriting global Image/Voice/Audio/Video routes.
Reasoning and capability validation
The picker renders only reasoning/effort levels actually exposed by the selected model/provider. It MUST NOT invent Low/Medium/High controls for a model that does not support them. Incompatible explicit selections are blocked or clearly explained unless an authorised fallback route can satisfy the requirement.
Aliases and model identity
Users can assign friendly aliases/nicknames to models. Aliases are presentation conveniences and may be duplicated; all routing objects store stable provider-scoped Dulche ModelID values so duplicate names never create ambiguous execution.
Local model lifecycle
Where supported, the full manager provides discover/install or pull, import, verify, download progress, load, unload, remove, update/replace, rollback, storage-location and compatible CPU/GPU/offload configuration. These operations use Dulche Runtime/Den and provider/package APIs rather than a second model-host implementation.
Provider support
Routes may contain compatible local runtimes, configured commercial/cloud providers, self-hosted/OpenAI-compatible endpoints, Ollama, another Dulche device, enterprise endpoints and authorised provider/Plugin implementations. Provider authentication and credentials remain owned by the appropriate shared credential/provider system.
Resource awareness
For local candidates the picker may show estimated RAM/VRAM requirement, current availability, loading state and reclaimable resources when known. On 9to1-OS this integrates with the AI-aware resource manager; on other Home platforms it uses the available Dulche/runtime resource information without pretending OS-level reclamation exists where it does not.
Administrator and managed-profile policy
Managed profiles may limit approved models/providers, acquisition, external cloud use, maximum cost/usage class or fallback destinations. Policy filtering happens before user ordering so reordering a blocked provider cannot bypass a School/organisation restriction.
Universal Model Picker acceptance requirements
Regular 9to1/Home and 9to1-OS use one canonical Dulche model catalogue and versioned routing contract.
Users can use one Active Model for everything compatible or configure separate capability/app/Agent and Background routes.
Ordered model routing automatically falls through on classified quota, availability, capability, context or resource conditions while respecting privacy, permissions and admin policy.
Capability mismatch is filtered before invocation where knowable; model fallback is not misused for unrelated tool/app/business-logic failures.
Users can reorder, enable/disable and inspect route candidates and understand which model ultimately handled a request.
Voice named variants, Image inheritance, Advanced Audio/Video, reasoning controls, aliases and local-model lifecycle preserve the existing category-specific contracts.
Dulche runtime control
Home Core owns the single shared Dulche broker/runtime lifecycle for native 9to1 apps. It MAY host multiple logical endpoints/models concurrently subject to resource policy, but apps MUST attach to the shared broker rather than launching competing private model servers.
Home MUST expose shared Dulche service state including Starting, Ready, Degraded, Restarting and Stopped plus endpoint/model load state, resource pressure and health/diagnostic information required for recovery. Logical EndpointID/SessionID identity remains governed by the Dulche Runtime contract.
If the visible Home shell closes, Home Core MAY continue in the background. If Home Core crashes/restarts, attached apps MUST enter a degraded/reconnecting state for Home-dependent features, preserve their own user data, and reconnect to restored shared services. Apps MUST NOT launch private replacement Dulche servers during recovery.
Permission and trust broker
Home owns the operational permission/trust broker defined by App APIs and automation permissions. It stores and evaluates caller identity, scoped grants, blocks, temporary trust, 30-day Accept and Trust grants, Accept and Always Trust grants, expiry/revocation state and audit history.
Settings MUST expose a Permissions & Trust management surface where the user can inspect caller identity/origin, granted apps/actions/scopes, trust level, creation/expiry, last-use metadata where available, and revoke/block/unblock/narrow grants. Revocation MUST affect future actions immediately subject to in-flight action semantics defined by the target API.
Mesh
Mesh is a Home feature, not a standalone app. It connects authorised user/team devices so selected 9to1 context, projects, Agents and capabilities can operate across devices without requiring every workflow to live entirely in remote cloud infrastructure.
Every Mesh device MUST have a stable DeviceID bound to an authenticated device identity/key rather than a mutable device name. Pairing MUST require explicit user/account authorisation and establish an authenticated encrypted relationship. A device advertises supported 9to1 capabilities/services and versions; peers MUST NOT assume capabilities that were not advertised.
Mesh data sharing/sync MUST be namespace/object scoped. Personal Mesh may sync selected personal Den/chat/context/project state; Team/Organisation modes may sync explicitly shared team/org state while preserving personal/private namespaces. Joining Mesh MUST NOT automatically share all local files, secrets, model context or app data.
Remote capability invocation MUST use typed APIs and pass both caller-side and target-device permission/policy checks. Mesh MUST NOT become an implicit generic remote-desktop, mouse/keyboard or arbitrary-code-execution channel.
Lost/revoked devices MUST be removable from Home. Revocation invalidates future Mesh authentication/session material for that device and prevents further sync/remote calls. Offline devices queue only operations whose owning service explicitly supports safe offline replay/conflict handling.
Action Graph renderer
Home owns the shared user-facing Action Graph renderer/source. Dulche owns execution graph/log data and persistence semantics; Home provides the reusable CUI/Markdown presentation component used to display authorised graph data.
Any authorised app MAY host the shared renderer given an authorised RequestID/ActionGraphID. Home MUST NOT create a second execution history or mutate Dulche’s causal graph merely for presentation. Events, Agents, Spaces and other surfaces MAY deep-link into the same renderer.
Home does not own the primary Voice, Vision or AI Overlay session controls. Those live in Vision & Voice; Home remains responsible only for the shared runtime/model configuration and renderer/platform services they consume.
Persistent contextual AI bar
Home owns the reusable base component/service contract for the global persistent bottom AI bar required by interactive 9to1 apps. The shared component provides CUI rendering, Dulche connection, Universal Model Picker integration, permission/trust plumbing, request state and common Action Graph access.
Each host app MUST provide the bar with a permission-filtered semantic context snapshot and its typed supported actions. Home MUST NOT obtain app context through raw screen scraping when the host provides structured context. App-specific mutation semantics remain owned by the target app APIs.
Floating compose @ invocation menu
The shared Home-owned floating AI compose component MUST provide one searchable @ invocation menu for Plugins, Skills, Apps, Agents and Files. The menu is a single interaction surface with collapsible type sections rather than separate unrelated pickers. Typing @ opens the resource list; typing text after @ filters across all sections while preserving each result's type and identity.
Selecting an item inserts an inline invocation chip/token inside the compose field at the caret position. The rendered token MUST display the resource's icon where available plus its human-readable label, for example an Agent may render as '@[agent icon] John'. The token MUST use a distinct invoked visual state, including colour/style differentiation, while also using non-colour cues for accessibility. Editing/deleting the token removes or changes the invocation rather than leaving invisible hidden attachment state.
Invocation tokens MUST store stable canonical identities, not only display text: Plugin PackageID/version or resolved active version, SkillID/version, AppID, AgentID/DefinitionRevision where required and File/Artifact reference identity/revision or access token as appropriate. Duplicate display names MUST therefore remain unambiguous. The resolved invocation set is included in request metadata, FullLog and Action Graph.
The Plugins section lists Dulche Plugins enabled/available in the current scope; Skills lists eligible Dulche Skills including the built-in Persistent Skill; Agents lists Agents available through Dulche scope resolution; Files searches authorised files/artifacts without silently granting new access. Availability in the picker never grants permission to execute protected actions or read inaccessible content.
The Apps section MUST contain every installed/available first-party 9to1 app plus user-installed applications that 9to1 can classify as safely operable through a typed API/integration or, when separately authorised, Computer Use. App entries MUST expose whether their interaction path is Typed/API, Computer Use Required, or both. Selecting an app whose only route is Computer Use MUST NOT activate Computer Use by itself; the request also requires the explicit @Computer Use invocation.
Game executables and anti-cheat-protected game surfaces MUST be excluded from the operable Apps invocation results even when discovered through Steam, Epic Games Launcher or another launcher/library. If 9to1 cannot confidently distinguish an eligible ordinary application from a game/anti-cheat target, it MUST omit or mark the target unavailable for Computer Use rather than risk automation. Play remains the supported Agent-game route defined by its own contract.
@Computer Use is a reserved first-party system capability entry in the same searchable invocation surface. Selecting it creates the explicit ComputerUseInvocationID required by the Dulche Computer Use contract and makes its active state visible in the compose field before the request is submitted.
Cross-app execution visualisation
Models operating inside any 9to1 app MAY invoke another 9to1 app only when the user's request explicitly names/invokes that app, directly asks for an outcome owned by that app, or unambiguously implies the owning app from the requested artifact/action. For example, 'create a presentation' resolves to Present; 'make a spreadsheet' resolves to Data; an unrelated app MUST NOT be opened merely because the model thinks it might be useful.
Cross-app intent resolution MUST bind to the owning app's stable AppID and typed capability contract. If the required app is not running, Home MAY launch/open it automatically when that is part of fulfilling the request. The target artifact remains canonical in its owning app, and the originating app/Space receives references/status rather than an unmanaged duplicate.
Typed app APIs and shared semantic actions are the normal execution path. Computer Use is not a fallback for missing/failed APIs and remains unavailable unless @Computer Use was explicitly invoked. Permission, review, edit/suggest/view state, conflicts and external-side-effect rules of the target app still apply to cross-app work.
Where an app has a visible editing surface, the user SHOULD be able to watch model-driven edits occur in real time. Home/shared app infrastructure MUST provide an execution-visualisation stream that maps semantic actions to visible UI changes such as objects moving, text appearing, selections changing, slides being created or a virtual cursor hovering over the affected target.
The execution visualiser is representational, not the control mechanism. A virtual cursor MUST be visually distinguishable from the user's real pointer and MUST NOT generate mouse/keyboard input merely to make the animation believable. The canonical typed API/action result remains authoritative; visual animation follows confirmed/provisional semantic events and MUST reconcile to final app state after errors, retries or rollback.
AI conversation presentation settings
Home Settings MUST expose global conversation presentation preferences for Plain text versus Speech bubbles. The preference applies to compatible 9to1 conversational/AI surfaces through the shared renderer rather than each app inventing a different message layout.
User-message alignment and model-message alignment MUST be independently configurable as Left or Right. All four combinations are valid, including both parties on the same side. Alignment changes presentation only and MUST NOT alter message order, authorship, accessibility reading order or exported conversation data.
The selected Dulche thinking-log mode (Precise, Concise, Detailed or Ramble) MUST be configurable in the same AI/conversation settings family. Inline thinking/work regions render beneath or between message text according to chronology; when Speech bubbles are enabled, the thinking/work region visually belongs beneath the relevant model bubble without being styled as ordinary model-authored message text.
Thinking/work presentation MUST use lower visual emphasis than normal chat while remaining readable and accessible. Collapsed 'Thought for ...'/'Worked for ...', ETA status, blockers and Problem events MUST use the same shared renderer across apps so equivalent Runtime state is not represented differently by each product.
Shared Productivity Engine
Home owns the Shared Productivity Engine used by Write, Present, Canvas, Boards and Spaces for overlapping document/object behaviours. The engine is a shared canonical object/rendering/action layer, not five copied implementations. App shells MAY provide different workflows and layout chrome, but a shared object type MUST use the same schema, formatting semantics, rendering rules and typed object actions wherever that type is supported.
The initial required shared object families include rich text/paragraphs, headings, lists/checklists, code blocks, equations, tables, images/media, drawings/ink, graph objects and typed embedded 9to1 artifact references. The registry MUST be extensible so a new shared object type can be implemented once and enabled in multiple supporting surfaces without rewriting its core editor/renderer.
App-specific document structures remain allowed. Present still owns slides and presentation-level layout; Canvas still owns its infinite spatial surface; Boards owns Board/Page hierarchy and Board-specific layout. The shared engine standardises reusable embedded/shared objects rather than forcing one top-level document model.
Canonical object identity, schemas and style registry
Every shared object instance MUST have a stable ObjectID within its owning artifact plus a versioned ObjectType/schema identifier. Object content, formatting, accessibility metadata, asset references and app-neutral layout properties MUST be serialisable independently from transient UI state. Unknown required schema versions MUST fail explicitly rather than being silently flattened or reinterpreted.
Shared object schemas MUST preserve enough information for semantically identical rendering/editing across participating apps. If an app cannot support a property, it MUST retain that property in the object payload when round-tripping and surface the limitation instead of destructively stripping it.
The engine MUST provide a shared versioned style registry for reusable text/paragraph/object style definitions. Style definitions use stable StyleID identity independent of display name so renaming a style does not detach existing objects. App-specific style extensions MAY exist but MUST preserve shared base properties when transferred.
Cross-app copy, paste and embeds
The engine MUST provide a versioned ProductivityObjectBundle clipboard/transfer format containing shared object payloads, style definitions, asset references, accessibility metadata and a portable fallback representation. Copying a supported object from one participating app and pasting it into another MUST preserve the same shared-object semantics and appearance rather than converting it to an image or lossy app-specific approximation.
When the destination supports the same shared object type, paste creates/imports a native shared object instance using the same schema. When the destination does not support that object type but supports embedded 9to1 artifacts, the UI MUST offer an embed/reference path. Destructive flattening is allowed only as an explicit export/paste-as-static action.
Spaces MUST use the Shared Productivity Engine for rich pasted/embedded content so tables, code blocks, drawings, graphs and other shared objects preserve their structure instead of degrading to plain text. Spaces may present a conversational shell around the object, but editing MUST route through the same shared object actions.
Rendering, editing, undo and actions
The engine MUST provide shared selection, focus, formatting, object insertion/removal, resize/transform where applicable, clipboard, accessibility and undoable action primitives for shared object types. Shared actions MUST have stable typed representations so compatible apps can participate in undo/recovery and AI/Automation execution without reproducing hidden per-app commands.
App-specific shells MAY add contextual commands, but MUST NOT fork the underlying object semantics into incompatible versions. Object actions MUST be exposed through typed APIs and usable by UI, Spaces, Automations and Dulche-driven AI without raw UI simulation.
The shared engine MUST emit semantic selection/context information for the persistent AI bar and app-specific contextual toolbars. This context MUST contain stable object/selection identity rather than requiring consumers to infer meaning from rendered pixels.
Drawing engine
The shared engine MUST expose the Rnote-derived drawing/ink engine as a reusable shared object/layer so Canvas and Boards use the same stroke model, pen/eraser behaviours and serialisation primitives. Other productivity surfaces MAY opt into the same drawing object without implementing a separate ink stack.
Deployment boundary and compatibility
Home Core MUST expose the Shared Productivity Engine as a versioned shared platform capability. Apps may link/embed approved shared engine libraries/components as part of their package for rendering performance, but the canonical schema registry, compatibility negotiation and shared service/version authority remain Home-owned. Apps MUST validate compatible engine/schema versions during startup.
Shared object schemas and ProductivityObjectBundle MUST be versioned independently of individual app versions. Home MUST expose compatibility negotiation so an older app can detect a newer unsupported shared object type/property before editing. Compatible unknown optional properties MUST be preserved; incompatible required features MUST produce a structured compatibility state rather than silent data loss.
Shared Productivity Engine API
9to1.ProductivityEngine.ListObjectTypes();
9to1.ProductivityEngine.GetObjectSchema(objectType);
9to1.ProductivityEngine.ListStyles(scope?);
9to1.ProductivityEngine.GetStyle(styleID);
9to1.ProductivityEngine.SerializeSelection(context);
9to1.ProductivityEngine.Paste(bundle, targetContext);
9to1.ProductivityEngine.CanPaste(bundle, targetContext);
9to1.ProductivityEngine.Convert(object, targetType, options?);
9to1.ProductivityEngine.GetSelection(context);
9to1.ProductivityEngine.ApplyAction(context, action);
9to1.ProductivityEngine.GetCompatibility(appID, appVersion);
The above are minimum cross-app entry points. Each shared object type MUST also expose its typed creation/update/query actions through the owning app/API surface required by the global API-parity rule.
Settings
Home Settings owns ecosystem-wide settings only. The Settings surface MUST include at least Account & Subscription, Appearance/CUI, AI & Models, Permissions & Trust, Apps & Updates, Storage, Mesh & Devices, Privacy, Accessibility, Notifications and Advanced/Diagnostics. App-specific preferences remain in the owning app unless a setting intentionally governs multiple apps.
Settings changes MUST use typed settings keys/schemas with validation and explicit scope (device, account, workspace/team or organisation where applicable). Unknown or incompatible settings versions MUST NOT be silently discarded during upgrade/downgrade.
Account and subscription surface
Home MUST provide the primary native CAKE ID account/subscription surface. It displays authenticated user identity, organisation/workspace context where applicable, current configured subscription/preset source, EntitlementPriceMonthly, EffectiveThresholds, EffectiveEntitlements, AI Dust balance/allocation/usage, storage allocation/usage, site limits/usage and active sessions/devices using server-authoritative values.
Home MUST NOT recalculate paid entitlements locally from a displayed tier label. Checkout, plan changes and sensitive billing management hand off to the trusted authenticated CAKEMODS billing flow defined by the Accounts & Subscription contract. Sign-out/session revocation actions MUST preserve local user data according to each app’s offline/storage policy rather than deleting it by default.
Notifications
Home owns the native 9to1 notification service/centre. Apps publish typed notifications containing NotificationID, source app/service, category/severity, title/body, created time, read/dismissed state, related entity references and typed actions/deep links. Notifications MUST NOT encode consequential behaviour only as arbitrary executable callbacks.
Home MUST support notification history, read/unread state, dismiss/clear subject to retention policy, per-source/category preferences and deep-link actions. Where Windows/9to1-OS system notifications are available, Home MAY bridge eligible notifications to the OS while retaining the canonical 9to1 notification record/state.
Shared search and Go indexing
Home owns/co-ordinates the shared searchable-entity index consumed by Go and Home Library/Search. Apps MUST publish supported searchable entity metadata through a typed indexing contract rather than Home scraping arbitrary app databases.
Search records MUST include stable source app, EntityID/type, title/display metadata, search/index text or vector references as permitted, modification state and current access-scope metadata. Search results MUST re-check current authorisation before exposing sensitive content or opening an entity; stale index access MUST NOT bypass revoked permissions.
On deletion/revocation, apps MUST be able to invalidate/remove affected index records. Home may maintain rebuildable indexes/caches, but the index MUST NOT become the only canonical copy of source content.
Service registry and compatibility handshake
Home Core MUST expose a machine-readable service registry describing Home-owned platform capabilities and versions. At minimum it includes Dulche broker/runtime coordination, permission/trust broker, Shared Productivity Engine, package/update service, notifications, search/index, Mesh and account/session capability availability.
Before normal startup, every native 9to1 app MUST complete a compatibility handshake against Home Core and declare the required service/capability versions it needs. Missing/incompatible required services result in the global Home repair/update/bootstrap flow rather than undefined partial operation.
Service identity/version MUST be explicit; apps MUST NOT infer compatibility solely from the Home marketing version string.
Startup, background lifecycle and recovery
Home Core MUST auto-start on demand or at session startup when required by installed 9to1 apps. Closing the visible Home window MUST NOT necessarily stop Home Core. Home Core shutdown is allowed only when no required dependent operation is active or when the user/system explicitly requests full 9to1 service shutdown.
Home Core persistent state MUST use crash-safe versioned storage. Corrupt or incompatible Home state MUST enter a diagnosable recovery/repair mode; Home MUST NOT silently discard permission grants, package state, device identities or other durable control-plane state to regain startup.
If a Home service fails while apps are open, dependent apps MUST receive a structured service-unavailable/degraded signal. They MUST preserve their own artifact state and block only operations that require the failed service. When the service recovers, clients reconnect/resynchronise through stable IDs/revisions rather than restarting with assumed fresh state.
Home data/state model
Home MUST maintain stable IDs/versioned records for installed packages/apps, Home services, Dashboard layouts/tiles, Mesh devices/pairings, notification records, search index records, permission/trust grants, account/session cache metadata and other Home-owned settings/control-plane entities. Display names, paths and UI ordering are not identity.
Caches/indexes that are rebuildable MUST be marked as non-authoritative. Durable grants, package activation state, device trust and user layout/settings state MUST be recoverable and versioned. Home MUST distinguish device-local state from account/workspace-synchronised state explicitly.
Home API
9to1.Home.GetState();
9to1.Home.GetServices();
9to1.Home.GetService(serviceID);
9to1.Home.GetCompatibility(appID, appVersion);
9to1.Home.Dashboard.GetLayout();
9to1.Home.Dashboard.UpdateLayout(layout, expectedRevision?);
9to1.Home.Dashboard.SetAIGeneratedTiles(enabled);
9to1.Home.Dashboard.SetAIReorder(enabled);
9to1.Home.Dashboard.AddTile(tileType, config?);
9to1.Home.Dashboard.RemoveTile(tileInstanceID);
9to1.Home.Dashboard.SetTilePinned(tileInstanceID, pinned);
9to1.Home.Apps.List();
9to1.Home.Apps.Install(packageID, versionOrChannel?);
9to1.Home.Apps.Update(appID, versionOrChannel?);
9to1.Home.Apps.Repair(appID);
9to1.Home.Apps.Rollback(appID, version?);
9to1.Home.Apps.Uninstall(appID);
9to1.Home.Library.Query(query);
9to1.Home.Events.Query(query);
9to1.Home.Discover.SearchModels(query);
9to1.Home.Mesh.ListDevices();
9to1.Home.Mesh.Pair(request);
9to1.Home.Mesh.Revoke(deviceID);
9to1.Home.Notifications.List(query?);
9to1.Home.Notifications.MarkRead(notificationID);
9to1.Home.Notifications.Dismiss(notificationID);
9to1.Home.Search.Query(query);
9to1.Home.Settings.Get(key, scope?);
9to1.Home.Settings.Set(key, value, scope?);
9to1.Home.Permissions.List();
9to1.Home.Permissions.Revoke(grantID);
9to1.Home.Permissions.Block(callerID);
9to1.Home.Permissions.Unblock(callerID);
These are minimum canonical entry points. Every additional user-visible Home operation MUST have an equivalent supported API/domain action under the global API-parity rule. APIs MUST return structured state/errors and use stable IDs/revision checks for consequential or concurrent mutations.
Security boundary
Home Core is a high-privilege local control plane. All local IPC/service calls MUST authenticate/identify the caller and evaluate the caller’s effective scopes before exposing privileged operations. Executable filename, window title or self-asserted display name MUST NOT be accepted as caller identity.
Installed signed/registered apps MAY use package identity plus Home-issued process/session credentials. Development/self-built callers MAY use an explicit registered developer/project identity with tamper-evident binding as defined by the global permission model. Trust MUST NOT silently transfer after a material caller identity/signing/content change.
Secrets/credentials MUST be stored through secure credential references and MUST NOT be persisted in plaintext Home configuration, logs, Events, Dashboard tiles or package manifests. Home logs/audits MUST redact secret payloads while retaining accurate action/provenance records.
Platform behaviour
Windows: Home provides the full native hub/shell, Home Core background services and the Home-hosted Universal Model Picker. Native apps depend on the compatible Home installation/Home Core handshake.
9to1-OS: Home Core/shared service contracts remain authoritative platform services, but selected controls may be integrated into OS-native system surfaces. The Universal Model Picker is OS-hosted while using the same canonical Dulche/model/provider state. 9to1-OS MUST NOT create divergent duplicate settings/package/model databases.
Web: the Home web surface uses CAKE ID and server-hosted equivalents for account, Library, Dashboard, notifications, search and other supported cloud capabilities. It MUST capability-negotiate and clearly mark local-only/native-only functions such as local package management, local models/devices or unavailable Home Core services rather than pretending they exist in-browser.
Failure behaviour
Home APIs/services MUST return structured failures including HomeServiceUnavailable, HomeServiceIncompatible, PackageIntegrityFailed, PackageDependencyConflict, PackageActivationFailed, DashboardRevisionConflict, TileProviderUnavailable, PermissionDenied, DeviceRevoked, MeshUnavailable, IndexUnavailable and AccountServiceUnavailable in addition to the global error contract.
Failures in one Home service MUST NOT automatically corrupt or erase unrelated Home state. For example, Discover/provider failure must not invalidate package state; search-index corruption must be recoverable by rebuilding the index; Dashboard tile-provider failure must degrade only affected tiles.
Acceptance requirements
Home is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
A native app refuses normal startup when Home is not installed and successfully resumes through the trusted Install Home/bootstrap flow.
Closing the visible Home window does not break dependent apps while Home Core remains healthy.
A Home Core/service crash produces structured degraded state in attached apps, preserves user artifacts and reconnects after service recovery without spawning duplicate private services.
Dashboard manual tile add/remove/resize/reorder/pin state persists across restart and responsive window sizes.
AllowAIGeneratedTiles=false prevents arbitrary generated tile creation while existing tiles continue to function.
AllowAIReorder=false prevents AI movement/layout changes; when enabled, AI cannot move pinned/locked tiles and every AI layout change is reversible.
Generated Dashboard tiles expose source provenance and fail stale/unavailable rather than fabricating live data.
Apps install/update/repair/rollback uses the shared package database and survives a failed staged activation without deleting user artifacts.
Library opens the same canonical artifact in its owning app rather than creating a duplicate.
Events preserve typed source records and link to the corresponding Action Graph/entity where applicable.
Discover aggregates at least two configured model/provider sources without identity collisions and performs a valid install/connect action.
Universal Model Picker override precedence and fallback policy resolve deterministically and do not cross local-to-cloud boundaries when policy forbids it.
Permission/trust grants can be inspected, narrowed/revoked/blocked and future calls immediately respect the updated state.
Mesh pairing establishes stable device identity; capability calls obey both ends’ permissions; device revocation prevents subsequent sync/invocation.
Home notifications preserve read/dismiss state and typed deep links across restart and OS notification bridging.
Search/Library results stop exposing content after permission revocation/deletion and indexes can be rebuilt without source-data loss.
A representative shared productivity object can round-trip across Write, Present, Canvas, Boards and Spaces through the Shared Productivity Engine without schema/format loss.
Account/subscription values shown in Home match the server-authoritative CAKE ID entitlement state and are not inferred from preset labels.
An app with an incompatible required Home service version is blocked into update/repair instead of running against an undefined interface.
Home persistent control-plane state can recover from process interruption without silently dropping package activation state, device trust or permission grants.
Node Graph Framework
Home owns the shared Node Graph Framework used by Automations and Space graph editors. It is an editing/schema/validation/execution-visualisation framework, not a second automation or AI runtime. Product surfaces register domain-specific events, actions and node types; Dulche and owning apps execute the resulting authorised runtime actions.
The framework MUST provide a versioned graph data model, stable GraphID/NodeID/PortID identity, node registry, typed input/output ports, typed connections, node configuration schemas, pan/zoom/selection, grouping/comments, copy/paste/duplicate, undo/redo, validation, Draft/Active graph revision support, execution-state overlays and contextual AI-bar integration.
Connections MUST be type-checked. Incompatible ports cannot connect unless an explicit registered conversion node exists. Nodes and graph actions MUST reference canonical stable app/capability/entity IDs rather than screen coordinates or UI implementation details.
The framework MUST support product-defined capability profiles. For example, built-in Spaces receive a constrained Events & Extensions node registry while user-created Spaces and Automations may receive broader registries. A capability profile cannot expose an action prohibited by the product/security contract.
Graph mutation from the contextual AI bar MUST use typed graph APIs. AI may add/remove/configure nodes and connections only within the current capability profile and permissions, and MUST NOT simulate mouse/keyboard graph editing.
9to1.NodeGraph.Get(graphID);
9to1.NodeGraph.Create(config);
9to1.NodeGraph.AddNode(graphID, nodeType, config?);
9to1.NodeGraph.RemoveNode(graphID, nodeID);
9to1.NodeGraph.SetProperty(graphID, nodeID, property, value);
9to1.NodeGraph.Connect(graphID, outputPortID, inputPortID);
9to1.NodeGraph.Disconnect(graphID, connectionID);
9to1.NodeGraph.Validate(graphID, revision?);
9to1.NodeGraph.Activate(graphID, revision);
9to1.NodeGraph.ListNodeTypes(capabilityProfile);
Node Graph Framework compatibility and migration MUST be versioned. When a node/hook schema is retired, affected graphs enter a diagnosable migration/needs-attention state rather than silently dropping nodes or connections.
9to1 Admin
ADM-01 — Product role, access and platforms
9to1 Admin is a standalone Business-exclusive 9to1 application, not a renamed account-settings page or WordPress administration screen. It is the organisation-management interface for the Business features specified separately under Business features — functional specification. Business and Business + include it; the account-bound free Business grant defined for Jacob also applies. App access does not grant administrative permissions: every operation additionally requires the appropriate role and target scope.
Admin MUST have Windows, 9to1-OS and browser/web surfaces sharing the same CAKE ID, organisation entities, domain APIs and permission evaluation. Native clients use Home’s shared services. The web app uses authenticated shared web services without requiring a local Home installation for ordinary organisation administration. Device operations require an enrolled compatible endpoint; a browser cannot directly enforce unsupported local OS controls. Unsupported capabilities MUST remain distinguishable from denied permission or an offline device.
Admin owns management workflows and policy editing. The account/billing service owns subscriptions and ledgers; Spaces owns Team Spaces; Files owns shared-drive content; Connect owns communications; Home/Mesh owns pairing and device-resource execution; Dulche/Den owns Agents; the 9to1-OS policy service owns endpoint enforcement. Admin MUST invoke these canonical services rather than create duplicate content, Agent registries, payment records or a competing permission broker. This is a native CUI product built on those existing services; no new paid administration donor or hosting service is selected by this specification.
ADM-02 — Navigation and organisation lifecycle
The start screen MUST list organisations the user can manage, with an explicit organisation switcher and current organisation identity on every administrative screen. Navigation MUST include Overview; People; Roles & Permissions; Policies; Models, Apps & Features; Plugins & Settings; Usage & Credits; Billing; Team Space & Drive; Connect; Devices & Mesh; Team Agents; and Audit & Activity. Visibility is permission-filtered, while denial states explain the required capability without leaking inaccessible organisations.
Overview MUST show member/seat counts, resource allocation and consumption, pending invitations/approvals, policy-deployment status, blocked actions, device health and billing state, each with source freshness. Unknown or stale values MUST NOT appear as zero or healthy. Search, filtering, accessible keyboard operation, bulk-selection previews and per-item bulk results are required. Admin is not an artifact editor: blank-document/template import surfaces are not applicable; organisation creation, invitation and configuration import/export replace them.
Authorised owners MUST be able to create and edit organisation identity, manage ownership, inspect linked Business entitlement, archive/reactivate the organisation and request export or deletion. Ownership transfer requires authenticated acceptance by the recipient; removing or suspending the last active owner MUST be rejected. Archive is recoverable and distinct from permanent deletion. Deletion requires an impact preview, explicit confirmation and the applicable retention/export workflow, and MUST NOT delete a member’s personal account or personal artifacts.
ADM-03 — People, roles and permissions
People management MUST support invite, resend/revoke invitation, accept, list/search, assign/change roles, suspend, reinstate and remove membership. Membership states MUST distinguish Invited, Active, Suspended and Removed, with stable MembershipID and UserID. Invitations are time-bounded and single-use for the intended identity. Acceptance and capacity reservation MUST be transactional so concurrent requests cannot bypass the seat cap. The UI MUST distinguish members, pending/reserved invitations and external Connect correspondents; corresponding counting rules must be explicit, not hidden billing assumptions.
Roles MUST be editable capability sets, not just labels. Provide owner, administrator and member roles, plus separately assignable billing, usage-reporting, device-management, Agent-management and audit-reading capabilities. Custom roles MUST support scoped read, add/edit, delete/recovery and specialised administrative actions. A role editor MUST show effective permissions and inherited restrictions. A delegated administrator MUST NOT grant capabilities outside their own delegation boundary, elevate themselves to owner or modify protected grants. Membership alone does not grant access to every shared document, private conversation or Agent memory.
Suspension/removal MUST revoke organisation sessions/capabilities, block new organisation-funded jobs, remove applicable shared access and reconcile owned organisation resources and outstanding reservations. Show a transfer/reassignment preview for shared assets, scheduled Automations and Agent responsibilities. Already completed external actions remain historical facts. Revocation MUST leave personal accounts and unrelated organisations intact; offline devices must report pending revocation until enforcement is acknowledged.
ADM-04 — Enforced policy editor
Administrators MUST be able to enforce organisation-wide and role-specific policies, inspect their effective result for a selected member/device/Agent, and preview affected objects before publication. PolicySet and PolicyAssignment records MUST carry stable IDs, schema version, revision, scope, author, effective time and change reason. A change follows Draft → Validated → Published, with per-target delivery/enforcement status; publication is not proof that an offline endpoint applied it.
Restrictions MUST cover model/provider access; apps; individual app features/actions; Plugins and their capabilities; Agents and Automations, including creation, editing, invocation, schedules and external side effects. Restricted capabilities must be enforced by the owning service at dispatch, not merely hidden in the UI. APIs, command-line tools, modified clients and nested Agent/Plugin calls receive the same policy decisions.
Effective capability grants are the intersection of server entitlement, delegated role, organisation/role policy, object access, caller trust and applicable device/privacy restrictions. A denial at a required boundary cannot be overridden by a broader grant elsewhere. Conflicting mandatory settings or required-versus-blocked Plugin rules MUST produce a validation conflict instead of an arbitrary last-write-wins outcome. New sensitive requests remain subject to Home’s normal approval rules.
ADM-05 — Required Plugins, forced settings and default models
Admin MUST support required organisation-wide Plugins and additional requirements by role, with package identity, approved version/update policy, required configuration and deployment status. Required does not mean silently trusted: package integrity, compatibility, requested scopes and secret connections must validate before enablement. A blocked or failed required Plugin produces an actionable non-compliance state. Disabling an unsafe Plugin remains possible for authorised security response; updates cannot widen permissions without the required approval.
Administrators MUST be able to force supported organisation/role settings and separately supply editable defaults. Members see the effective value, whether it is locked and which policy supplies it. Settings must be addressed by versioned typed keys supported by the target app/device; unsupported settings cannot be reported as applied. Forced settings affect only the managed scope and cannot silently rewrite personal settings outside it.
Default-model configuration MUST support organisation defaults and role-specific defaults, plus permitted user overrides. The effective model must also satisfy model restrictions, entitlement, capability, privacy and local/cloud routing rules. An unavailable or prohibited default blocks with a clear reason or uses an explicitly authorised fallback; it MUST NOT silently send private local-only content to a cloud provider. Conflicting forced role defaults must be resolved explicitly in policy configuration before publication.
ADM-06 — Subscription assignment, usage controls and rollover
Usage & Credits MUST let authorised administrators assign a funded subscription/resource configuration to a member or role, choose a shared organisation pool or individually partitioned allocations, set limits, inspect consumption/reservations and move eligible unspent organisation-owned allocation between partitions. Changing a display tier or role MUST NOT mint credits, unlock an unfunded model band or duplicate an allocation. A cost-changing assignment requires the Billing approval flow rather than silently purchasing resources.
Controls MUST include organisation, role and member ceilings for AI usage and applicable storage/site resources; warnings and hard-stop behaviour; configured time windows; and model/Agent/Automation attribution. A hard ceiling is enforced before work is admitted. No paid overage or automatic top-up is enabled merely because a warning threshold is crossed. Reports MUST separate allocated, available, reserved, consumed, rolled-over and expired credits and display the reset/expiry policy and freshness.
Admins MUST be able to configure, by role, whether eligible expired/expiring credits may roll over, with explicit inheritance, allow or disallow settings and the supported carryover period/cap. This is a real server-enforced credit-lifecycle rule, not an interface label. Credit lots retain source allocation, original expiry, rollover policy/version and resulting expiry, with an auditable rollover event. Changes cannot spend the same credit twice or alter settled usage. Eligibility, funding and allowed carryover bounds come from the versioned billing policy; unresolved commercial durations are OPEN rather than guessed. Members MUST see their effective rollover rule.
ADM-07 — Billing, invoices and reporting
Billing MUST expose the current Business add-on, seat capacity, funded resource configurations, invoice/payment status and authorised invoice download, plus a preview of changes and their effective date. Separate the fixed organisation add-on from AI/storage/other resource costs. There is no per-seat fee. Usage allocation may change resource cost, but an invitation or role assignment must not conceal a seat charge.
Purchases, upgrades or other spending require an authorised human’s explicit approval of a current quote identifying organisation, currency, itemised amount, recurring terms and effective date. Paid carrier numbers, third-party services and hosting are separate spending decisions. Approval must be bound to the quote/version and protected against replay; a changed or expired quote requires a new decision. Raw payment details remain in the trusted billing flow, never in Admin client code, Plugins, prompts or logs.
Analytics MUST offer permission-filtered totals and breakdowns by period, member, role, model, app, Agent and pool, with exportable reports and reconciliation to ledger events. Estimates/forecasts are labelled separately from settled charges. Reporting is operational accounting, not covert inspection of message contents, documents or personal activity. Personal-account usage is excluded unless explicitly and validly brought into the organisation billing scope.
ADM-08 — Shared resources, devices and team Agents
Team Space & Drive MUST manage organisation ownership, role/group access, sharing restrictions, storage limits, access reviews, archival/recovery and export through Spaces/Files. Connect management MUST cover the organisation directory, channels/groups, delegated organisational identities, allowed external contact and Agent channel bindings through Connect. Administrative metadata access does not create a plaintext backdoor to encrypted or private conversations.
Devices & Mesh MUST expose enrolled devices, owner/account, platform, supported capabilities, trust/enrolment state, last contact, effective policy and resource contributions. Authorised actions MUST include enrolment approval, group/role assignment, policy deployment, access/resource revocation and inspection of acknowledged enforcement. Cross-account Mesh grants require explicit enrolled-device trust and configured compute/storage limits. A stale/offline device remains Pending or Unknown; a submitted command is not reported as executed.
Team Agents MUST list canonical organisation Agents and support create/import, assign owner/scope, edit/publish versions, configure model/tools/required Plugins and budgets, share invocation access, schedule approved work, pause/resume/stop, archive/recover and inspect authorised run history. AI Studio opens the same Agent for detailed authoring. Administrative control cannot silently copy private user memories, credentials or grants into a shared Agent. Revoked members cannot keep invoking an organisation Agent through an old endpoint.
ADM-09 — Audit, failure and recovery
Consequential management actions MUST record AuditEventID, OrgID, verified actor/delegation, action and target IDs, timestamp, policy/revision, approval reference where required, redacted before/after state and observed outcome. Policy evaluation denials, privilege changes, billing approvals, credit adjustments, device grants and Agent publication/revocation are auditable. Audit permission is separate from content access; secrets and unnecessary personal content are excluded. Administrators cannot silently edit historical audit entries.
Mutations use optimistic revision checks and idempotency keys. Multi-target jobs expose JobID, target-level Succeeded/Failed/Pending/Skipped/RolledBack states, retry eligibility and cancellation limits. Failed policy rollout retains the last acknowledged safe policy and offers scoped rollback, not an invented all-success state. Unknown billing/external-action outcomes must be reconciled before retry. Offline administrative clients may inspect permitted cached metadata with a stale marker but cannot assert that a new server policy or purchase has taken effect.
ADM-10 — Canonical data and API contract
Canonical records MUST include Organisation, Membership, Role, CapabilityGrant, PolicySet, PolicyAssignment, ResourcePool, MemberAllocation, CreditLot, DeviceEnrolment, MeshGrant, TeamAgentBinding, Approval, AdminJob and AuditEvent. Each carries stable IDs, OrgID where applicable, lifecycle and revision/schema metadata. Identity and subscription authority remain server-side; caches are derived and permission-filtered. Exports omit secrets and preserve portable configuration plus dependency references; imports validate compatibility and require a dry-run/impact preview before mutation.
The canonical management namespace is 9to1.Admin. Required action families are Organisations (List, Get, Create, Update, TransferOwnership, Archive, Restore, Export, RequestDeletion); Members (List, Invite, RevokeInvitation, AcceptInvitation, SetRoles, Suspend, Reinstate, Remove); Roles (List, Create, Update, Delete, GetEffectivePermissions); Policies (Get, Preview, Validate, Publish, GetDeployment, Rollback); Resources (GetUsage, SetAllocation, SetLimits, TransferAllocation, SetRolloverPolicy); Billing (GetConfiguration, PreviewChange, OpenCheckout, ListInvoices, DownloadInvoice); SharedResources (Get, PreviewAccessChange, ApplyAccessChange); Devices (List, Enrol, AssignPolicy, Revoke, GetEnforcement); Mesh (ListGrants, Grant, Revoke, SetLimits); Agents (List, Bind, Configure, Publish, SetAccess, SetBudget, ControlRun, Archive, Restore); and Audit/Jobs (List, Get, Export, Cancel where cancellable). Domain operations dispatch to their existing owning service; these are management entry points, not duplicate runtime implementations.
Every action contract MUST declare typed arguments/results, permission scope, risk, reversibility and external effects. Scoped requests include OrgID and stable target IDs; mutations include ExpectedRevision and IdempotencyKey. Collection APIs provide cursor pagination and bounded page sizes; jobs provide JobID, status and target results. Success returns canonical IDs, new revision and applied/pending status. Failures return structured codes including PermissionDenied, EntitlementRequired, SeatLimitReached, PolicyDenied, PolicyConflict, RevisionConflict, InsufficientCredits, QuotaExceeded, ApprovalRequired, QuoteExpired, DeviceOffline, UnsupportedCapability and ProviderUnavailable, with recoverability/retry metadata. UI-only management actions are non-conformant.
ADM-11 — Acceptance and release gates
Acceptance MUST prove: a non-Business account cannot gain Admin capabilities; Business access without an admin role does not grant privileged operations; Jacob’s verified free grant works without enabling another account; a Business organisation with 50 active seats cannot admit a 51st concurrently; and Business + has no subscription seat cap while ordinary resource/security limits still apply. Verify that adding an unfunded seat never creates a seat invoice.
End-to-end tests MUST cover organisation ownership transfer and last-owner protection; invite/suspend/remove with immediate server access revocation; custom-role restrictions through UI and direct API; blocked models/apps/features/Plugins/Automations; required Plugins by organisation and role; forced settings and default-model conflicts; shared versus individual budgets; role-based rollover; concurrency-safe credit reservation/settlement; itemised quote approval and retry protection; shared-resource ACLs; cross-account Mesh opt-in/revocation; and team-Agent isolation and lifecycle.
Platform tests MUST cover Windows, 9to1-OS and web, including browser administration without local Home, unsupported endpoint controls and offline rollout remaining pending. Test restart/persistence, stale revisions, partial bulk failure, rollback, secret redaction, report reconciliation, keyboard/focus/screen-reader operation and equivalent API behaviour. Lists MUST remain paginated, exports/rollouts asynchronous where long-running, and expensive reports must not block policy checks. A rendered dashboard or stub action is not implementation completion.
ADM-12 — Explicit open decisions
OPEN: exact billing-period and carryover durations/caps not already fixed by the authoritative subscription policy; how pending and suspended memberships count toward reserved seat capacity; any Business +-only feature beyond the absence of a seat cap; contractual retention/support commitments; and supported version boundaries for endpoint management. These require explicit canonical decisions before the relevant behaviour ships. Do not invent paid SSO/SCIM, unlimited compute/storage, support SLAs, remote full-device wipe or access to personal content as implicit Business features.
Files
Product role and donor-first implementation
9-1 Files is both the native CUI file-manager app and the 9to1 hosted storage service. The desktop/native product is donor-backed by Files/WinUI and MUST first reach behavioural/layout parity with the selected appropriate donor source before 9to1-specific extensions are treated as complete. CUI replaces the rendering/framework layer; the donor’s mature information architecture, workflows, interaction semantics and quality-of-life behaviour remain the baseline unless a scoped donor-parity exception is recorded.
The parity baseline includes applicable donor navigation/sidebar structure, toolbar/commands, tabs, back/forward history, breadcrumbs/address bar, file/folder views, details/grid layouts, sorting/grouping, context menus, properties, previews, search, tags/favourites, drag/drop, clipboard, archives, network/location handling, keyboard shortcuts, selection behaviour, file-operation UX, progress/conflict dialogs, session restoration and other user-visible donor behaviours available in the selected legally usable source.
A donor-parity manifest MUST identify the selected donor revision and classify each applicable donor feature as Preserve, Replace with 9to1-native equivalent or Not applicable. Proprietary donor AI is not copied; equivalent AI functionality uses Dulche/9to1 APIs. Subscription/account infrastructure specific to the donor is not inherited unless independently required by this specification.
Authority and ownership boundaries
Files owns file/folder identity, hosted storage, locations/providers, structural hierarchy, transfers, sync, versions, sharing/ACLs, Trash/recovery, file-operation history and filesystem-level collaboration. Files does NOT own semantic editing/collaboration inside another app’s document/project format.
The owning app remains authoritative for semantic file content and live in-document collaboration: Write owns Write-document collaboration, Present owns presentations, Boards owns Boards content, Canvas owns Canvas content, Data owns workbook/database semantics and Stack owns Git/Stack source-control semantics. Files stores and synchronises durable revisions produced by those apps but MUST NOT attempt to merge paragraphs, spreadsheet cells, Board blocks, Canvas strokes or Git histories generically.
Raw/unowned binary/text files use Files’ revisioned-content storage model. When two clients concurrently modify bytes and no owning semantic merge engine exists, Files MUST preserve both conflicting revisions or expose a structured conflict; it MUST NOT silently choose the newest wall-clock timestamp.
Canonical identity and item model
Every 9to1-hosted file and folder MUST have a stable FileID or FolderID independent of name, path, sort position or parent. Rename and move MUST preserve identity. Paths are human-facing projections of hierarchy and MUST NOT be used as canonical identity by other 9to1 apps.
Hosted file metadata MUST include at least FileID, ParentFolderID, Name, ItemType, content/media type, owner/scope, size, created/modified timestamps, current content revision, sync/availability state, sharing state and version metadata. Folders MUST expose equivalent stable identity and ordered/queriable child relationships.
Synced local materialisations of 9to1 Drive items MUST retain metadata linking the local file to the canonical hosted FileID and base/current remote revision. Identity MUST NOT be reconstructed from pathname alone.
Locations and provider abstraction
Files MUST expose all storage roots through one typed Location/Provider abstraction. Required native location classes include 9to1 Drive, local disks, removable storage and supported network locations. Connected cloud providers MAY be added through adapters.
Every provider MUST declare capabilities explicitly, including read, write, rename, move, copy, trash, permanent delete, versions, sharing, offline availability, search, streaming, server-side copy/move, change feeds and any provider-specific constraints. The UI and APIs MUST disable/report unsupported operations rather than pretending parity exists.
Provider authentication and secrets MUST be stored through secure credential references. Provider-specific OAuth/tokens MUST NOT be persisted in plaintext Files configuration or logs.
Desktop shell, tabs and views
The CUI desktop shell MUST preserve the donor’s applicable tabbed browsing, navigation history, breadcrumbs/address bar, command toolbar, sidebar/location hierarchy, selection behaviour and view-management semantics. Session restore MUST reopen the prior tab/location set where available; unavailable removable/network locations restore into an explicit unavailable state rather than being silently discarded.
Grid/list/details and other applicable donor view modes MUST be supported. Sort, group, visible columns, thumbnail size and compatible folder/view preferences MAY persist per-folder or per-location according to provider capability.
Folder colour customisation
Files MUST support native folder-colour customisation independently of any OneDrive-specific donor capability. Users can choose from presets or an arbitrary colour using a full colour wheel/picker, apply the chosen presentation to a folder and reset it to the default appearance.
Folder colour is Files presentation metadata associated with the stable folder identity, not a pathname-only hack. It must work for local folders and 9to1-hosted folders and should work for connected-provider folders where provider capability or Files-owned metadata permits. A provider that lacks native folder-colour metadata MUST NOT force Files to disable the feature if the presentation override can safely be stored by Files.
Where compatible with sync/account policy, folder-colour metadata may follow the canonical folder across devices. Files MUST expose the same typed operation to Dulche and Automations, enabling actions such as changing selected/project folder colours without GUI automation.
Native 9to1 creation and project integration
Files MUST replace Office-centric creation defaults with first-class 9to1 creation entries. The toolbar/context New menu MUST include at least Folder, Write document, Presentation, Spreadsheet/Data artifact, Board, Canvas and Stack project when the current location/provider can store the requested artifact.
Creation MUST invoke the owning app’s canonical API rather than having Files manufacture private document internals. For example, creating a Write document from Files calls the Write creation API and receives the resulting canonical ArtifactID/FileID. Files owns placement/storage; the owning app owns document structure.
Files MUST support Create Stack here and Create Stack from this folder for appropriate folders. The latter registers/imports the existing source location as a Stack project rather than creating a nested duplicate source tree. Stack identity/backing remains owned by Stack; Files supplies the selected backing location/reference.
App/project folders MAY expose a project-aware representation so users see a meaningful project entity instead of internal managed metadata by default. Advanced inspection MAY reveal underlying files when the owning app permits it. Files MUST respect app-managed/protected metadata markers and warn/block casual destructive edits that would corrupt managed project state.
9to1 Drive integration
9to1 Drive MUST appear directly in the normal Files sidebar/location tree alongside local drives and other providers. Hosted storage MUST NOT open into a separate incompatible cloud-files UI. Desktop, web and owning apps address the same canonical hosted objects by stable IDs.
A file uploaded through cakemods.com and later opened in desktop Files MUST refer to the same FileID/content revision, not a separately imported desktop copy. Local materialisation is a cache/replica of the hosted object associated with FileID/revision metadata.
Hosted storage MUST expose quota/allocation, used space and pending/reserved upload space where applicable. Quota exhaustion MUST fail structurally and MUST NOT leave invisible orphan uploads.
Rapid push-based sync architecture
Sync is a core correctness requirement. 9to1 Drive MUST use event/push-driven incremental synchronisation as the normal connected path. Polling/full rescans are recovery/fallback mechanisms and MUST NOT be the primary source of ordinary change propagation.
The server MUST produce ordered change events for filesystem-level changes including create, rename, move, metadata change, content-revision commit, delete, restore, share/ACL changes and relevant availability/sync metadata changes. Connected clients maintain a durable SyncCursor/last acknowledged server revision and apply deltas incrementally.
On reconnect, a client submits its last durable cursor plus pending local operation journal state; the server returns deltas since that cursor, the client reconciles queued local operations, then resumes the live stream. Duplicate/replayed operation IDs MUST be idempotent and MUST NOT perform consequential mutations twice.
Ordinary metadata operations such as rename/move/create MUST be pushed immediately after commit and processed continuously by connected clients. Intentional multi-minute delays for normal metadata propagation are non-conformant. Foreground/open artifacts and explicit manual sync receive scheduling priority over background hydration/prefetch.
Optimistic local operations
User-initiated structural operations SHOULD feel immediate. Files MAY optimistically apply a local rename/move/create to the UI before the remote round trip, but MUST record the operation durably as Pending with OperationID, expected/base revision and inverse/recovery metadata.
If the server accepts the mutation, the operation becomes committed/synced and remote clients receive the corresponding event. If validation fails, Files MUST reconcile/reverse the optimistic state and display the structured reason; it MUST NOT leave the UI pretending the server accepted a rejected mutation.
Sync and availability state
Hosted items MUST expose explicit sync/availability state rather than a generic spinner. Required states include CloudOnly, Hydrating, AvailableOffline, AlwaysAvailable, LocalChanges, Uploading, Synced, Conflict, Paused and Error. Internal implementations MAY maintain separate content and metadata states so lightweight metadata can become synced while content transfer continues.
CloudOnly means metadata is locally visible but content bytes are not guaranteed local. AvailableOffline means content is currently materialised and may be evicted by managed cache policy only when safe. AlwaysAvailable means the user has pinned the content and Files MUST retain a local copy until the user changes that policy or storage becomes critically unavailable and the user explicitly resolves the situation.
Opening, previewing or an owning app requesting bytes for CloudOnly content triggers hydration on demand. Hydration MUST expose progress/failure and MUST NOT claim the item is locally available before durable content validation completes.
Manual sync and sync-on-demand
Files MUST provide visible manual sync controls, including Sync now, Sync this item, Sync this folder/selection, Pause sync, Resume sync, retry eligible failures and refresh/reconcile from cloud. Manual sync is an acceleration/reconciliation control, not a substitute for reliable automatic sync.
Sync now MUST flush eligible pending local mutations, request current server deltas since the durable cursor, retry eligible transfers, reconcile conflicts that have deterministic policy and report the resulting pending/error/conflict state. It MUST NOT discard unsynced changes merely to match cloud state.
Offline-first behaviour
Locally materialised files/folders MUST remain usable offline according to their owning app/file-format capabilities. While offline, Files MUST allow safe queued structural operations including create folder, rename, move, delete/restore and reorganisation, and it MUST allow edits to locally available content through the owning app.
Offline mutations enter a durable ordered operation journal that survives Files/Home/process/device restart. On reconnect, operations are reconciled against remote revisions/permissions before commit. Blind last-write-wins based solely on timestamps is prohibited for conflicts.
Free up space MUST verify that the canonical hosted revision is durable and equivalent/newer before evicting local bytes. Items with unsynced local content MUST NOT be evicted. AlwaysAvailable items MUST NOT be evicted by normal cache cleanup.
Real-time filesystem collaboration
Files MUST provide real-time collaboration for filesystem structure and Files-owned metadata. Connected authorised clients viewing the same hierarchy should receive live create, rename, move, delete/restore, share/ACL and metadata updates without requiring manual refresh.
Structural mutations MUST carry stable OperationID, actor/caller identity, target object ID, base/expected revision, operation type and result revision. Simultaneous incompatible structural edits MUST produce a deterministic RevisionConflict/Conflict object rather than silently letting whichever request arrived last overwrite the other.
If an owning app has a file open by FileID and another collaborator moves/renames that file, Files MUST publish LocationChanged/metadata events while preserving FileID. The owning app continues editing the same canonical file without losing attachment simply because the path changed.
Semantic collaboration inside a file is exclusively owned by the file’s owning app. Files receives/commits durable revisions from that collaboration layer and exposes version/storage metadata, but it MUST NOT run a second generic content-collaboration engine over the same file.
Transfers
Copy, move, upload, download and provider-transfer operations MUST be represented as durable Transfer jobs with TransferID, item set, source/destination, bytes/items totals where known, progress, state, retryability, error list and pause/resume/cancel support where technically possible.
Hosted uploads/downloads MUST use resumable/chunked transfer when the service/provider supports it. Files/Home restart MUST resume from validated committed chunks where possible rather than restarting large transfers from zero.
Transfer completion MUST include integrity validation where hashes/checksums are supported. Integrity failure is a failed transfer and MUST NOT be represented as successful-with-warning.
Destination conflicts MUST use explicit policy: Ask, Replace, KeepBoth or Skip, with ApplyToRemaining where appropriate. Automated callers MUST specify a policy or receive ConflictRequiresDecision.
Version history and durable revisions
9to1 Drive files MUST have durable version history. Each durable revision MUST include VersionID/RevisionID, timestamp, actor/source, parent/base revision where relevant and content identity/hash where available. Restoring an older revision MUST create a new current revision or otherwise preserve the later history rather than deleting it.
Owning apps MAY commit incremental/semantic collaboration checkpoints, but Files stores the durable file/artifact revision boundary supplied by the app. Files MUST not reinterpret app-specific internal history as generic filesystem versions unless the owning app explicitly publishes those revisions.
Trash, delete and recovery
Normal hosted deletion MUST be soft/recoverable. Trash records MUST preserve stable item ID, original parent/location, deletion timestamp and restoration metadata. Permanent purge is a distinct high-risk operation.
Deleting a Files container or reference MUST NOT silently cascade-permanently-delete separately owned embedded/project artifacts unless the owning app explicitly defines cascade semantics and Files presents the impact before execution.
Sharing and ACLs
Hosted files/folders MUST support first-class sharing using stable account/team/organisation principal IDs. Required ACL concepts include owner, direct grants, inherited grants and viewer/editor-style capability roles or their equivalent typed scopes.
Folder permission inheritance MUST distinguish inherited from direct grants. Moving an item between differently permissioned folders MUST calculate/result in an explicit effective permission change and MUST NOT silently retain/remove direct grants contrary to the configured inheritance policy.
Shared with Me MUST reference canonical objects owned elsewhere rather than cloning them into the recipient’s Drive. Revocation affects future access immediately subject to already-downloaded/offline-data retention policy.
If public/link sharing is supported, link shares MUST use revocable ShareID/token state with explicit permission level and optional expiry/password where implemented. Raw file URLs MUST NOT themselves imply authority.
Search, metadata and previews
Files MUST support filename/folder search plus indexed metadata/content search where provider/file-type policy permits. Files publishes supported searchable entities to Home’s shared index; current permissions are rechecked when rendering/opening results.
Common item metadata MUST include provider/location, type, size, relevant timestamps, owner/sharing, sync/offline state, current revision and hashes/integrity data where available. App-specific metadata MUST be namespaced/versioned.
Files MUST provide preview/thumbnail contracts. Owning apps/providers MAY register read-only preview renderers for native artifacts. Preview MUST NOT mutate the source artifact or require launching a full app window unless no lightweight preview capability exists.
Open routing, context actions and drag/drop
Home’s app/file-handler registry determines default/open-with routing. Native 9to1 artifacts MUST expose enough type/version metadata that routing is not dependent solely on filename extension. Users MAY choose alternate compatible handlers where supported.
Installed apps MAY contribute typed registered context actions based on item type/capability, such as Open in Write, Add to Board, Open in Pictures, Create Stack from folder or other ecosystem actions. Context actions MUST be declared through Home’s registry and MUST NOT inject arbitrary untrusted shell code into Files.
Drag/drop and clipboard operations MUST preserve operation intent, source identity and provider capability. Cross-provider drag MUST make copy-vs-move semantics explicit. A cut/paste MUST NOT delete the source until destination commit succeeds.
AI bar and privacy
Files MUST host the global persistent contextual AI bar. The Files context snapshot includes current location/provider, selected FileIDs/FolderIDs, artifact types, sync state and permissions. AI requests use typed Files/owning-app/Stack actions for operations such as organise, rename, move, convert, summarise or create a Stack.
Selecting a private local file MUST NOT silently upload file content to a cloud model. Dulche’s local/cloud privacy and permission rules apply. Context handoff MUST identify the exact file/revision being provided and whether bytes/content leave the device.
Files MUST remain fully functional with AI disabled/unavailable. AI is additive and MUST NOT replace essential manual file-management UI.
Operation journal, undo and change feed
Consequential filesystem operations MUST be recorded in a durable operation journal with OperationID, actor/caller, target object IDs, source/destination where applicable, base/result revisions, state and structured error/result. The journal supports crash recovery, sync reconciliation and auditability.
Safely reversible operations such as rename, move and soft-delete SHOULD expose undo by performing a real inverse storage mutation against current revision checks. Undo MUST NOT be UI-only fiction and MUST fail explicitly if intervening changes make the inverse unsafe.
Files MUST expose a resumable typed change feed with stable event IDs/cursors for create/change/move/share/delete/restore/sync-state and other supported filesystem events. Automations/watchers can resume from a cursor without arbitrary full rescans.
Properties and sync diagnostics
A Properties/details surface MUST expose stable identity, path/location, provider, type, size, timestamps, owner/sharing, sync/offline state, current version/history access, app association and provider-specific metadata where available.
Files MUST provide clear sync diagnostics for 9to1 Drive, including current connectivity/server contact, pending uploads/downloads, pending structural operations, conflicts, paused/error state, offline-pinned usage and local cache usage. Item-level errors MUST expose local/base/cloud revision information where relevant and provide Resolve/Retry/View details actions.
Safety and filesystem edge cases
Provider adapters and local materialisation MUST define handling for illegal/reserved filenames, case sensitivity, path length, path traversal, symlinks/reparse points and unsupported metadata. Remote names MUST NOT escape the intended local sync root or overwrite unrelated local paths.
Filesystem shortcuts/symlinks MUST remain distinct from 9to1 artifact references/shortcuts. Copying a reference MUST NOT accidentally clone the referenced canonical artifact unless the user explicitly chooses duplication.
Files API
9to1.Files.ListLocations();
9to1.Files.GetProviderCapabilities(locationID);
9to1.Files.List(locationID, parentID?, query?);
9to1.Files.Get(itemID);
9to1.Files.CreateFolder(parentID, name);
9to1.Files.CreateArtifact(parentID, artifactType, config?);
9to1.Files.Rename(itemID, name, expectedRevision?);
9to1.Files.Move(itemID, destinationFolderID, expectedRevision?);
9to1.Files.Copy(itemID, destinationFolderID, policy?);
9to1.Files.Delete(itemID);
9to1.Files.Restore(itemID);
9to1.Files.Purge(itemID);
9to1.Files.Upload(destinationFolderID, source, options?);
9to1.Files.Download(itemID, destination, options?);
9to1.Files.Transfer.Get(transferID);
9to1.Files.Transfer.Pause(transferID);
9to1.Files.Transfer.Resume(transferID);
9to1.Files.Transfer.Cancel(transferID);
9to1.Files.Sync.GetState();
9to1.Files.Sync.GetItemState(itemID);
9to1.Files.Sync.Now();
9to1.Files.Sync.Item(itemID);
9to1.Files.Sync.Folder(folderID);
9to1.Files.Sync.Pause();
9to1.Files.Sync.Resume();
9to1.Files.Sync.SetAvailability(itemID, CloudOnly | AvailableOffline | AlwaysAvailable);
9to1.Files.Sync.ListPending();
9to1.Files.Sync.ListConflicts();
9to1.Files.Sync.ResolveConflict(conflictID, resolution);
9to1.Files.GetVersions(itemID);
9to1.Files.RestoreVersion(itemID, versionID);
9to1.Files.Share.Get(itemID);
9to1.Files.Share.Grant(itemID, principalID, role);
9to1.Files.Share.Revoke(itemID, principalID);
9to1.Files.Search(query);
9to1.Files.Changes.Subscribe(cursor?);
9to1.Files.Changes.GetSince(cursor);
9to1.Files.CreateStack(folderID, options?);
These are minimum canonical entry points. Every additional donor-parity and 9to1-native user-visible operation MUST have an equivalent typed Files or owning-app action under the global API-parity rule.
Failure behaviour
Files MUST return structured failures including ItemNotFound, RevisionConflict, NameConflict, ConflictRequiresDecision, PermissionDenied, ProviderUnavailable, ProviderCapabilityUnsupported, QuotaExceeded, Offline, TransferInterrupted, IntegrityFailed, SyncConflict, FileInUse, StorageUnavailable, InvalidName, DestinationUnavailable, HomeServiceUnavailable and structured partial bulk results in addition to the global error contract.
Platform behaviour
Windows and 9to1-OS native Files expose local, removable, network, hosted and connected-provider locations according to platform/provider capability. Web Files exposes hosted/provider-accessible content but MUST NOT pretend to have arbitrary access to the browser user’s local filesystem. Browser local upload/download uses explicit browser-authorised file/folder selection.
Acceptance requirements
Files is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
The CUI port accounts for applicable Files/WinUI donor functionality and preserves its core layout/workflows/QoL through a donor-parity manifest.
9to1 Drive appears as a normal first-class location and the same FileID opened via web and desktop represents the same canonical hosted object.
Rename/create/move on one connected client appears live on another client without manual refresh and preserves stable item identity.
Moving/renaming a file while it is open in its owning app does not break the open document because the app remains attached by FileID.
Manual Sync now flushes eligible pending operations, retrieves server deltas and reports unresolved errors/conflicts.
A CloudOnly file hydrates on demand; AvailableOffline works without network; AlwaysAvailable survives restart/cache cleanup.
Free up space refuses to evict unsynced content and verifies durable cloud revision before eviction.
Offline structural operations survive device restart and reconcile correctly after reconnect.
Two conflicting concurrent binary/raw-file edits preserve both revisions or create an explicit conflict; no version is silently lost.
Two collaborators concurrently reorganising the same hierarchy receive deterministic structural conflict behaviour rather than blind last-write-wins.
A large resumable upload survives Files/Home restart and continues from validated committed progress.
A failed transfer integrity check is reported as failure and never as completed.
Version history and restore preserve later history and identify actor/source/revision.
Trash/restore/purge behave distinctly and purge uses the elevated destructive flow.
Sharing/ACL changes propagate to connected clients and revocation prevents future authorised access.
Creating Write/Present/Data/Board/Canvas artifacts from Files invokes the owning app and creates canonical artifacts.
Create Stack here/from this folder produces the expected Stack project without duplicating existing source.
Owning-app real-time collaboration commits durable Files revisions without Files attempting semantic content merges.
Provider capability differences disable/report unsupported operations rather than pretending support.
Bulk operations return exact succeeded/failed/skipped outcomes and never silently lose items.
Private local content is not sent to a cloud AI merely because it is selected in Files.
Change-feed cursor resume does not require a full filesystem rescan and does not duplicate consequential events.
Home crash/recovery preserves pending sync journal state and does not create duplicate operations or storage corruption.
A very large hierarchy can process ordinary incremental changes without complete rescans for each event.
Connect
Product role and donor strategy
9to1 Connect is the native CUI communications and collaboration application for people, teams and organisations. It combines real-time messaging, voice/video calling, SMS/RCS integration, organisational collaboration and the full Mail experience inside one coherent product. Connect is the parent communications product; Mail remains a first-class child mode/subsystem rather than being removed or flattened into chat.
The whole Connect application MUST use an open-source donor/reference for mature real-time communications behaviour. Element, together with Matrix as its underlying open communications protocol/reference architecture, is the preferred donor/reference for real-time messaging, rooms/conversations, threading, reactions, multi-device state, end-to-end encryption, presence-compatible collaboration and calling. The selected donor revision and applicable licensing obligations MUST be recorded in the donor-parity manifest before implementation.
The existing Mail subsystem retains Thunderbird as its preferred mature donor/reference for email protocol, MIME, IMAP/SMTP, authentication, offline mail, attachments, drafts, folders/labels, threading, certificates and mature email edge cases. Connect MUST NOT replace Thunderbird mail behaviour with a reduced chat-derived email implementation.
Donor parity applies to mature behavioural capability, interoperability and edge-case handling, not donor-native visual chrome. Connect MUST use a modern native CUI design consistent with 9to1. Proprietary donor services or branding MUST be replaced with 9to1-native equivalents where required.
Architecture and canonical entities
Connect MUST maintain stable canonical identities for at least UserID, ProfileID, OrganisationID, MembershipID, RoleID, ConversationID, RoomID/ChannelID where applicable, MessageID, ThreadID, CallID, ParticipantID, ContactRelationshipID, ReportID, IncidentID, EnforcementActionID and BanEvasionCaseID. Display names, usernames, email addresses, phone numbers, room names and mutable paths MUST NOT be used as canonical identity.
Email messages remain Mail entities governed by the Mail subsystem and its provider semantics. Native Connect chat/room messages remain Connect/Matrix-style communication entities. The product MAY provide unified navigation/search/notifications over both, but MUST NOT merge email and real-time messaging into one incompatible storage/protocol model.
Connect SHOULD use canonical 9to1 services rather than duplicating them. Shared files SHOULD reference canonical Files objects when applicable; assignments/tasks SHOULD reference canonical Planner objects where appropriate; Home owns notifications/permissions; Dulche provides AI; Contacts/people services own canonical contact data where defined.
Conversations, organisations and hierarchy
Connect MUST support one-to-one conversations, group conversations, organisation/team rooms or channels, threaded replies, reactions, message edits, message deletion according to policy, typing indicators, read state/receipts where enabled, presence/availability controls, mentions, attachments/media and conversation search subject to encryption/indexing constraints.
Users MAY belong to multiple organisations simultaneously. Organisations MUST support nested teams/departments/groups and explicit role/membership relationships, including organisational hierarchies such as management/employee or school leadership/department/teacher/student structures. Hierarchy MUST be represented through stable role/membership data rather than inferred only from room placement or display names.
Role and organisation policy MAY govern room creation, membership management, announcement rights, moderation powers, task assignment and administrative settings, but organisation policy MUST NOT silently override personal privacy protections that are not genuinely necessary for the organisation to operate.
Mail mode
Mail is a first-class Connect mode and retains the complete canonical Mail specification, Mail APIs and Thunderbird donor contract. Users MUST be able to use Mail as a complete manual email client with AI unavailable. Connect MUST provide coherent navigation between Mail and real-time communications while preserving the different underlying protocols, privacy properties and provider semantics.
Mail MAY remain independently deep-linkable and launchable where the package/shell architecture supports app shortcuts, but such launch targets resolve to the Mail mode of the canonical Connect application rather than creating a second incompatible Mail implementation.
Native messaging encryption and privacy
Native Connect conversations MUST use end-to-end encryption by default. Ordinary native Connect users MUST NOT be offered a misleading normal-chat mode that silently downgrades private communication to server-readable plaintext merely for implementation convenience.
The implementation MUST follow the platform-wide Privacy Ceiling and apply stricter communications protections where required. Content decryption keys MUST be available only to authorised endpoint devices/participants under the declared trust model. Servers MUST NOT possess a universal content-decryption key or silent moderation/decryption backdoor while the product claims E2EE.
Multi-device encryption MUST define device identity, device trust, key distribution, verification, rotation, lost-device handling, session recovery and cryptographic backup/recovery. Recovery MUST NOT introduce a server-held master key that silently allows universal message decryption.
Connect MUST minimise communication metadata separately from content encryption. Participant graphs, timestamps, delivery state, IP/network information, device identifiers, routing metadata and notification data MUST be collected/retained only as required for operation, safety or declared policy and MUST NOT be presented to users as E2EE-protected when they are observable to infrastructure.
Notification delivery MUST minimise plaintext leakage. Notification previews of encrypted conversations MUST use the most private technically reliable path and MUST respect user settings; push providers MUST NOT receive unnecessary message content.
Search/indexing over encrypted content SHOULD occur locally or through another architecture that preserves the declared E2EE model. Server-side plaintext indexing of native E2EE conversations is prohibited unless the user has explicitly exported/disclosed specific content into a separately governed service.
Disappearing messages
Connect MUST support disappearing-message policies at conversation and/or message scope. Policies MAY include predefined and custom expiry periods and MUST expose the active expiry state visibly enough for participants to understand it.
Expiry MUST be represented canonically and reconcile across authorised devices, including devices that were offline at the expiry time. Expired content MUST be removed from ordinary conversation history and applicable local indexes/caches according to the declared lifecycle.
Connect MUST NOT claim that disappearing messages prevent screenshots, manual copying, external capture or information already legitimately disclosed outside the conversation. Quoted/replied-to message representations MUST NOT preserve the full expired content indefinitely unless an explicit retention/evidence rule requires it.
Safety reports/evidence records that lawfully and transparently retain reported content are separate from ordinary disappearing-message history and MUST have their own access, purpose and retention policy.
SMS and RCS
Connect MUST support SMS and RCS where the current platform, telephony stack, carrier/provider and user permissions allow it. SMS/RCS identities and transport state MUST remain distinct from native Connect messaging.
The UI MUST truthfully represent the protection of the actual transport used. Ordinary SMS MUST NOT be labelled end-to-end encrypted. RCS MUST show E2EE only when encryption has actually been negotiated/supported for that conversation and participant set.
If an intended RCS message would fall back to SMS, any material change in privacy/security capability MUST be represented clearly enough that the user is not led to believe the stronger state still applies. Transport fallback MUST NOT reuse an E2EE badge/state from the prior route.
Voice and video calling
Connect MUST provide mature one-to-one and group voice/video calling with expected modern functionality including incoming/outgoing calls, ringing, missed calls, call history, join/leave/reconnect, participant roster, grid/speaker layouts, pin/spotlight where applicable, microphone mute/unmute, camera enable/disable, camera switching, input/output device selection, screen/window/application sharing, optional system-audio sharing where supported, reactions, raise hand, in-call text chat, picture-in-picture/full-screen and accessible keyboard/screen-reader controls.
Calls MUST use end-to-end encrypted media wherever the selected call architecture supports the native Connect trust model. Signalling and sensitive call state SHOULD receive equivalent or stronger protection where technically feasible. Infrastructure MUST NOT claim stronger privacy than the actual transport provides.
Microphone, camera and screen-capture permissions MUST be explicit, visible and revocable. Joining a call MUST NOT silently enable the camera or microphone contrary to the user's saved/default state. The UI MUST continuously and unmistakably show local mic/camera/screen-share state.
Call infrastructure MUST minimise retained metadata, and self-hosted/private infrastructure SHOULD be supported where compatible with the donor/protocol architecture. TURN/relay/direct-connect behaviour and the associated exposure of participant network addresses MUST be documented and privacy-aware.
Background blur, noise suppression, gain control, camera filters/effects, virtual backgrounds and similar media processing SHOULD run locally where technically practical. A cosmetic filter MUST NOT silently upload raw camera/microphone content to an external processor.
Recording, transcription and AI participation
Recording is disabled by default. Starting recording MUST use a Request Recording workflow rather than an immediate unilateral record action.
Before recording begins, every current participant MUST explicitly approve the recording request. Any participant declining or failing to approve within the defined request state prevents recording from starting. Approval is scoped to that recording session and MUST NOT become a permanent blanket permission.
When recording is active, all participants MUST receive a persistent, unmistakable recording indicator. A participant joining after recording has started MUST be informed before/while joining that recording is active and MUST explicitly acknowledge/approve participation under the recording state before their media is included. A new participant's refusal MUST prevent their media from being recorded and, where the architecture cannot isolate them, MUST pause/stop recording until consent is resolved.
Recording state, requester, participant approvals, start/stop times and resulting artifact identity MUST be auditable. Recordings MUST be stored as permissioned canonical artifacts with explicit owner/access/retention policy rather than hidden provider blobs.
Recording permission MUST NOT imply permission for transcription, AI summarisation or remote model processing. Recording, transcription and AI participation are separate capabilities with separate disclosure/permission requirements.
Adding Dulche, an Agent, transcription service or other non-human processor to a human conversation/call MUST be visible to affected participants where it can receive their communication. Ordinary access by the local Connect client to decrypted E2EE content does NOT automatically grant Dulche/cloud models access.
Contact and communication privacy controls
Connect MUST provide first-class Block, Mute and Contact Settings controls. Blocking and muting MUST be semantically distinct: mute suppresses attention/notifications according to user policy; block prevents the blocked identity from contacting/interacting with the blocker through applicable Connect channels and MUST be enforced beyond merely hiding content locally.
Contact Settings MUST allow the user to control, where applicable, who can directly message them, call them, video call them, add/invite them to groups, see presence/last-active, see read receipts and access profile/contact fields. Unknown contacts MAY be routed to message/contact requests rather than the primary inbox.
Per-conversation notification/mute controls, read-receipt controls, presence controls, privacy/discoverability controls and block lists MUST be available without requiring AI.
Reporting and Trust & Safety
Connect MUST provide a first-class Report workflow for inappropriate, abusive, fraudulent or illegal content/behaviour. Reporting MUST be possible from messages, conversations, calls, contacts/accounts and relevant media where evidence is available.
Because native Connect messaging is E2EE, routine server-side moderation MUST NOT silently scan all decrypted private conversations. A participant-initiated report MAY deliberately disclose selected reported messages/media and the minimum necessary surrounding context/provenance to the Trust & Safety system. The reporting UI MUST make the disclosure scope understandable.
Reports are allegations, not strikes. A Report MUST NOT automatically become a verified violation or count as an offence merely because it exists. Trust & Safety must distinguish Report, Incident and EnforcementAction as separate canonical objects.
Reported user-supplied text, quoted messages, media metadata and report descriptions are evidence/input, not privileged instructions to the moderation system. Prompt-like content inside evidence MUST NOT be able to override moderation policy or system instructions.
Moderation AI
Connect MAY use an intelligent AI-assisted Trust & Safety evaluator to triage reports, correlate evidence, identify repeat patterns, create/maintain structured Incident records and recommend or apply policy-defined protective restrictions.
The moderation AI MUST NOT expose a direct free-form conversational prompt surface to ordinary users. Users interact through structured report/appeal flows; they MUST NOT be able to directly prompt the moderation model to punish another user.
The evaluator SHOULD produce structured results including alleged policy category, evidence reviewed, provenance, confidence/uncertainty, severity, verified prior Incidents where policy permits, pattern/repetition state, recommended action, automatic-action eligibility and human-review requirement. User accusation volume alone MUST NOT be treated as proof.
Automatic detection/evaluation MUST resist coordinated false-report campaigns, duplicate-report amplification, fabricated evidence where provenance can be checked, prompt injection within evidence and circular reliance on previous unverified allegations. Dismissed/overturned reports/incidents MUST NOT continue increasing enforcement severity.
Protective restrictions MAY be applied quickly when needed to stop ongoing harm, including reporter-specific contact blocking, temporary DM/call restrictions, new-contact limits, invitation restrictions, media restrictions or rate limits. These temporary protections are distinct from a Connect-wide ban.
Severe-offence ban threshold
A Connect-wide account ban is a last-resort enforcement action reserved for severe offences or a substantial verified history of serious misconduct. Ordinary disagreements, unpopular opinions, isolated low-level rudeness or weak/ambiguous reports MUST NOT result in a Connect-wide ban.
Ban-eligible examples include accounts demonstrably operated primarily for scams/phishing or large-scale malicious spam; repeated targeted harassment/stalking/doxxing; repeated serious threats or malicious impersonation/scams; distribution of illegal images/content; or comparably severe abuse supported by evidence and applicable policy.
A substantial history means verified Incident records, not raw Report count. Multiple unverified or dismissed reports MUST NOT accumulate as though they were convictions.
Enforcement SHOULD be proportionate below the severe-ban threshold and MAY include warnings, temporary communication restrictions, feature-specific suspension, contact/request limits, group-invite restrictions, rate limiting or temporary account suspension according to policy.
Every ban MUST reference the applicable policy category, supporting IncidentIDs/evidence basis, decision source, effective time, duration/permanence, review status and appeal state. The system MUST preserve the distinction between evidence, analysis and final enforcement.
Permanent or long-duration account-wide sanctions SHOULD require stronger evidentiary confidence and/or human review according to severity and policy. Clearly malicious automated/scam accounts with strong evidence MAY be restricted rapidly without artificial delay merely because the final action is severe.
Appeals
Affected users MUST have a clear appeal mechanism for significant restrictions and bans. Appeal review MUST inspect the evidence and enforcement decision rather than merely rerun the identical model prompt and automatically return the same result.
Overturned enforcement MUST remove or appropriately quarantine the sanction's contribution to future escalation/ban-evasion logic. Audit history MAY retain the historical decision for accountability, but it MUST NOT continue operating as an active verified offence.
Ban-evasion and alternate-account detection
An active Connect ban MUST NOT be trivially circumventable by creating or switching to another account. Connect MUST provide a privacy-preserving Ban Evasion Risk Engine capable of identifying likely alternate accounts used to evade an active severe sanction.
Detection MUST be purpose-limited to security/abuse enforcement and MUST comply with the Privacy Ceiling. It SHOULD combine multiple relevant signals rather than relying on one simplistic identifier. Signals MAY include verified account relationships, device/account linkage legitimately available to 9to1, authentication attributes, repeated malicious behavioural patterns, overlap of abuse targets, timing patterns, organisation relationships and payment/entitlement linkage where applicable.
Shared IP address, household, school/workplace network, carrier NAT, VPN use or a shared device MUST NOT by itself establish that two accounts belong to the same banned person. Legitimate possession of multiple accounts is not ban evasion.
The engine MUST distinguish low-, medium- and high-confidence linkage. Low-confidence matches SHOULD trigger additional verification, monitoring within permitted bounds or temporary protective limits rather than automatic permanent inheritance of the original ban. High-confidence evidence tied to a severe active ban MAY cause the alternate account to inherit/continue the restriction according to policy.
Every suspected linkage MUST create a BanEvasionCase with evidence/signal references, original EnforcementActionID, confidence, decision and review/appeal state. Banned-account linkage MUST NOT depend on weakening E2EE or reading unrelated private messages.
Signals from an overturned/dismissed ban MUST be removed from active enforcement decisions. Anti-alt detection MUST NOT evolve into a general-purpose cross-service fingerprinting system unrelated to preventing sanction evasion.
AI and encrypted communication boundary
Dulche MAY assist with permitted Connect tasks such as drafting, summarisation, search, action extraction and organisation, but encrypted communication content is not automatically AI context. The user/organisation policy and the local/cloud Privacy Ceiling determine what content may be exposed.
A local AI route MAY process authorised content locally according to permissions. Sending decrypted chat/call/email content to a cloud model requires an authorised cloud-processing route and MUST NOT occur merely because the cloud model is the global fallback.
AI-generated actions that send messages, email, make calls, change membership, report users or perform enforcement are consequential typed actions subject to the normal Home permission/risk model plus any stricter Connect rule.
Agent updates — contact through Connect
Agents MUST be emailable, callable and textable through Connect. This includes email through Connect's Mail subsystem, supported voice-call routes, and text messaging through Connect, including SMS/RCS when an authorised configured provider/device supports that transport. Agents MUST appear as addressable Agent contacts rather than requiring users to open a separate Agent chat before contacting them.
Channel addresses/endpoints MUST resolve to the same canonical Agent identity. Incoming contact MUST route to that Agent and its authorised runtime; responses MUST return through the relevant Connect channel with conversation/call/run correlation. Agent permissions, memory boundaries, caller access, availability, privacy, retention and external-action approvals remain governed by the existing contracts. A message or call from a third party MUST NOT automatically acquire the account owner's permissions. Unsupported or disconnected transports MUST be reported accurately. Provisioning paid numbers, carrier services or other paid infrastructure requires separate spending authorisation.
Connect Agent-channel API and acceptance
Extend Connect’s existing contact and communication APIs for Agent contact/channel configuration, endpoint resolution and the supported email, voice-call and text operations. Preserve canonical Agent, Conversation, Call and Run IDs, permission scopes, correlation and idempotency on retries. Tests MUST deliver an email, call and text to the intended canonical Agent through each supported configured route and verify its response on that route; cover revoked caller access, disconnected or unsupported transport, failed delivery and prevention of duplicate external sends. A required route lacking a working supported implementation remains an explicit gap, not a completed parity claim.
Connect API and events
Connect MUST expose typed APIs for conversations/messages, organisations/memberships/roles, contacts/privacy controls, calls, SMS/RCS routing where supported, reporting, safety state and user-authorised actions. Email-specific operations remain under the canonical 9to1.Mail API and are reachable through Connect without duplicating them.
Minimum Connect API families MUST include conversation list/get/create/update/membership, message send/edit/delete/react/thread, contact/block/mute/settings, organisation/membership/role, call start/join/leave/media-state/screen-share/record-request/record-state, report/create/status/appeal, and change/event subscriptions. Every consequential action MUST use stable IDs, structured results, revision/conflict semantics and the global permission/audit contract.
Trust & Safety internal APIs MUST be separately permissioned from ordinary client APIs. Direct user clients MUST NOT receive privileged moderation-model prompt access or arbitrary enforcement mutation authority.
Failure and recovery
Connect MUST provide structured failures including ConversationNotFound, MembershipDenied, EncryptionStateUnavailable, DeviceNotTrusted, KeyRecoveryRequired, TransportUnavailable, SMSFallbackRequired, CallUnavailable, MediaPermissionDenied, RecordingConsentRequired, RecordingConsentDeclined, ParticipantConsentPending, ReportNotFound, EvidenceUnavailable, EnforcementDenied, AppealUnavailable, BanEvasionReviewRequired and ProviderCapabilityUnsupported in addition to global errors.
Network interruption MUST preserve unsent messages/call state truthfully, reconcile delivered/read state after reconnect and avoid duplicate sends. Encryption/session recovery MUST NOT silently reset conversation security or create a new unverified device identity without disclosure.
Acceptance requirements
Connect is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least: native one-to-one and group chat with E2EE; multi-device key/device trust and recovery; threads/reactions/typing/read-state/presence controls; organisation/team hierarchy; complete Thunderbird-derived Mail mode; SMS/RCS transport-state truthfulness; mature one-to-one/group voice/video calls; screen sharing and standard call controls; local media effects where applicable; unanimous recording consent including future joiners; distinct recording/transcription/AI permissions; block/mute/contact privacy controls; disappearing messages; participant-initiated encrypted-chat reporting without universal server decryption; structured AI-assisted report triage without user prompt access to the moderation model; proportionate restrictions; severe-only Connect-wide bans; appeals; privacy-preserving ban-evasion detection; and enforcement of the platform-wide Privacy Ceiling.
Mail
Product role and donor strategy
9-1 Mail is the native CUI email client for connected accounts. It MUST be a fully capable manual email client with AI disabled or unavailable. AI is additive: it may summarise, search, draft, rewrite and triage, but core reading, composition, sending, organisation, search, offline use and account management MUST remain directly usable without AI.
Thunderbird is the preferred mature technical donor/reference for email protocol and compatibility behaviour, including IMAP, SMTP, OAuth, MIME parsing, attachments, offline mail, drafts, folders, threading, search foundations, junk/spam handling, certificates and mature email edge cases. Donor reuse MUST comply with the selected source version and licensing.
Donor parity applies to mature email capabilities and behaviours, NOT to Thunderbird’s visual shell. Legacy donor chrome, menus, dialogs, pane styling or dated interaction patterns MUST NOT be reproduced merely for parity. The final product MUST be a modern, clean, native CUI Mail interface designed for 9to1.
A Mail donor-parity manifest MUST identify the selected donor revision and classify applicable capabilities as Preserve, Replace with 9to1-native equivalent or Not applicable. Proprietary AI/subscription services from any donor/provider are not copied.
Modern CUI shell and responsive layout
The default desktop layout MUST use a clean three-pane structure: navigation/account sidebar, message/conversation list and reading pane. Visual separation MUST be subtle and CUI-native rather than relying on heavy boxes, legacy toolbars or nested window chrome. Message content should receive the majority of visual emphasis.
Users MUST be able to select reading-pane right, reading-pane bottom or reading-pane off, plus supported density options. Smaller windows MUST responsively collapse the layout into two-pane or single-pane navigation without squeezing unreadable columns.
The message list MUST prioritise sender/avatar or initials, subject, concise preview, timestamp, unread/important state and attachment/category indicators. Low-frequency controls MAY appear on hover/selection while common quick actions such as archive, delete, star and snooze remain directly discoverable.
The reading pane MUST present a compact sender/recipient/date header, clear reply/reply-all/forward/other actions and an uncluttered message body. Long conversations MUST support collapsing older messages/quoted sections without losing access to full content.
The final client MUST not expose donor-native UI surfaces. Settings, account management, compose, security prompts and advanced inspection must all use 9to1 CUI unless an OS-level credential/security dialog is explicitly required.
Sidebar and navigation
Mail MUST provide a unified top-level navigation including Unified Inbox, Starred/Favourites, Snoozed, Drafts, Sent, Scheduled, Outbox, Archive, Junk and Trash where the effective connected-account capabilities permit them. Individual accounts appear below with collapsible provider-native folders/labels.
Unified views are query/projection surfaces over canonical provider/account messages and MUST NOT duplicate messages into a separate mailbox. Actions taken from a unified view route to the owning AccountID/provider semantics.
Provider-native structures MUST be preserved. Gmail-style labels, Outlook categories/folders and generic IMAP folders MUST NOT be flattened into one simplistic hierarchy when that would break provider behaviour.
Account and provider model
Every connected mailbox MUST have stable AccountID identity independent of mutable email address/display name. MailAccount MUST store at least provider type, provider account identity, primary address/display name, supported capability set, authentication reference, sync configuration, signature configuration and sending configuration.
Mail MUST support generic IMAP + SMTP as a baseline and provider-native adapters where beneficial, including Gmail/Google and Outlook/Microsoft. Provider adapters MAY expose richer push, label, thread, archive, snooze, scheduled-send or search behaviours while remaining behind the common Mail contract.
Provider capabilities MUST be discovered/declared explicitly, including labels vs folders, archive, snooze, scheduled send, native search, push/change feed, undo send, aliases/from identities, read receipts, encryption/security features and provider-specific actions. Unsupported actions MUST be hidden/disabled or return ProviderCapabilityUnsupported rather than appearing functional.
OAuth 2.0 is preferred when supported. Credentials/tokens MUST be stored through secure credential references. Token refresh, revoked access, reauthentication, app-password/provider-password flows and certificate errors MUST be handled without deleting valid local cached mail.
Message, thread and folder identity
Mail MUST maintain stable local canonical identities for AccountID-scoped messages and threads. Message records MUST include MessageID, AccountID, provider-native message ID, Internet Message-ID where present, ThreadID/provider conversation identity where applicable, folder/label state, timestamps, sender/recipients, flags and provider change/revision token where available.
Internet Message-ID MUST NOT be assumed globally unique enough to serve as the sole database identity. Provider-native IDs are authoritative only within their AccountID/provider scope.
Threads/conversations preserve ordered references to individual messages, participants, subject/summary metadata, unread count and latest-message state. Provider-native thread identity MUST be preserved when available. Generic IMAP MAY use a deterministic local threading model, but Mail MUST distinguish local grouping from provider-native conversation identity.
Mail MUST NOT automatically merge threads across separate accounts solely because subjects or Message-ID relationships appear similar.
Message rendering and privacy
Mail MUST safely render plain-text and HTML email, inline images, quoted replies, signatures and attachments. HTML MUST be sanitised; arbitrary message script/executable application code MUST NOT execute in the trusted Mail surface.
Remote images/external tracking resources MUST be blocked, privacy-proxied or otherwise privacy-controlled by default according to Mail privacy settings. The UI MUST provide a clear per-message/per-sender Load remote content/trust action rather than silently leaking message opens.
Mail MAY offer tracking-protection features such as known tracking-pixel blocking or privacy-preserving remote-image proxying, but protection state MUST be visible and breakage must be recoverable by the user.
Compose and drafts
Compose MUST use a clean CUI editor that can operate as a focused pane/window and provides From identity/account, To, Cc, Bcc, subject, rich-text body, plain-text mode, attachments, inline images, signatures, reply/reply-all/forward and provider-supported message options. Recipient fields SHOULD progressively disclose Cc/Bcc rather than permanently consuming space.
The composer SHOULD use Home’s Shared Productivity Engine for supported rich-text primitives, while exporting through an email-compatible formatting pipeline that produces valid email-safe HTML plus a plain-text alternative. Unsupported rich shared objects MUST be explicitly converted/attached rather than silently mangled.
Drafts MUST autosave and survive app/process restart. Local/provider draft conflicts MUST preserve both revisions or surface a conflict rather than silently overwriting newer user text.
FromIdentity MUST be separate from AccountID so provider-supported aliases can define address, display name, Reply-To and signature independently.
Attachments and Files integration
Attachments MUST expose stable AttachmentID scoped to MessageID plus filename, MIME type, size, Content-ID where relevant, download/cache state and security state. Attachment bytes MAY hydrate on demand according to offline/cache policy.
Attachment actions MUST integrate with Files/Home handlers, including Open, Save, Save to 9to1 Drive, Save all, Add to Board and Open in compatible owning 9to1 app where applicable. Attachment saving creates a normal Files item and MUST not alter the original message.
Compose MUST support Attach from Files across local files, 9to1 Drive and authorised connected providers. A future/share-link mode MAY send a hosted Files link instead of attaching bytes, but it MUST be an explicit access-semantic change rather than an invisible optimisation.
Sync, push and offline behaviour
Mail sync MUST use the fastest reliable provider mechanism available: provider push/change streams, webhooks or IMAP IDLE/incremental change tokens first; periodic polling/full mailbox scans only as fallback/recovery. Every account maintains durable sync/change cursor state and pending local operation state.
Mail MUST provide Sync all, Sync this account, Sync this folder, Retry failed sync, Pause sync and Resume sync controls plus clear sync diagnostics including last successful contact, pending operations and errors.
Offline use MUST support configurable caching of headers, recent/full message bodies and attachments on demand, plus selected folders/messages available offline. Cached mail remains readable without network.
Offline-safe mutations including read/unread, star, label/category, move, archive, delete/restore, draft updates and queued sends MUST enter a durable operation journal and reconcile on reconnect using provider change tokens/revisions. Blind timestamp-based last-write-wins is prohibited for conflicts.
Send pipeline, Outbox and Undo Send
Outgoing messages MUST have explicit lifecycle states including Draft, Queued, Sending, Sent, Failed and Cancelled. An offline Send enters Outbox/Queued and MUST NOT be represented as Sent until the provider accepts the message.
Mail MUST support client-side Undo Send through a configurable local hold delay before provider submission, even when a provider has no native undo. During the hold window the user can cancel. After irreversible provider submission, Mail MUST NOT claim that the send remains undoable unless the provider genuinely supports cancellation.
Send failures MUST remain visible/retryable in Outbox with the actual provider/transport error and must not silently discard the draft/message.
Scheduled send
Scheduled send MUST use provider-native scheduling when available. Otherwise Mail may use a reliable 9to1 server/cloud scheduler or device-local scheduler only when its execution guarantees are accurately represented.
The UI MUST identify execution location/guarantee as Provider scheduled, 9to1 cloud scheduled or This device scheduled. Device-local schedules MUST clearly state that execution depends on the device/runtime being available; they MUST NOT masquerade as guaranteed server scheduling.
Search and smart views
Mail search MUST support sender, recipient, subject, message body where indexed/available, attachment name, date range, account, folder/label, read/unread, attachment presence, categories/labels and starred state. Provider-native search MAY be used but cached/offline content MUST also support local indexed search where policy permits.
Users MUST be able to save supported queries as smart views/folders. Smart views are dynamic queries over canonical messages and MUST NOT duplicate messages.
Rules and automation integration
Mail MUST support convenient message rules/filters for provider/local-supported triggers such as sender, recipient, subject and message metadata with actions such as move, label/category, mark read, star, notify or hand off to Automations.
Cross-app consequential workflows MUST be represented through Automations/typed app APIs rather than hidden arbitrary scripts inside Mail rules. Rule execution MUST be auditable and idempotent where replay is possible.
Snooze, archive and delete semantics
Snooze MUST hide/deprioritise a message/thread until a specified time and restore it to the appropriate attention view. Provider-native snooze is preferred where available; a 9to1 metadata-layer implementation MAY be used only if it preserves provider consistency.
Archive and Delete MUST be provider-aware. Archive may mean removing an Inbox label or moving to a configured Archive folder depending on provider. Delete MUST distinguish remove-current-label/folder, move to Trash and permanent delete where the provider exposes those concepts. Permanent deletion is a high-risk explicit action.
Signatures, aliases and contacts
Mail MUST support per-account and per-FromIdentity signatures with rich-text plus plain-text fallback. Signature selection may be automatic per identity but remains user-editable in the composer.
Recipient autocomplete SHOULD use authorised shared Contacts/people services and provider contacts where configured, with local recipient history as fallback. Mail MUST NOT make its message database the canonical contacts store.
Notifications
Mail MUST publish typed notifications through Home Notifications for events such as new important mail, send failure, authentication required and significant sync error. Notifications MUST deep-link to the exact AccountID/ThreadID/MessageID or relevant settings surface.
Mail MUST NOT implement a second incompatible notification centre; Home owns notification history/preferences/OS bridging.
Persistent AI bar and AI action boundary
Mail MUST host the global persistent bottom AI bar. Its context snapshot may include AccountID, current folder/view, selected MessageIDs/ThreadIDs, DraftID and selected recipients/content according to current permissions.
Supported AI experiences MAY include summarise thread, identify action items, draft/rewrite a reply, conversational mailbox search, triage suggestions and creation of typed cross-app actions such as Planner items or saving attachments.
Ordinary conversational AI MUST NOT silently send email merely because it generated a draft. Sending remains a consequential typed Mail action subject to the Home permission/risk model. An explicitly authorised Agent/Automation MAY send autonomously only when its effective permission/trust scope permits Mail.Send.
Mail content provided to Dulche MUST obey local/cloud privacy policy. Selecting a mailbox/thread MUST NOT implicitly upload the whole mailbox to a cloud model. Context scope such as selected messages, current thread or explicit mailbox search MUST be represented and permission-filtered.
Security, phishing and remote-content safety
Mail MUST provide conventional safety signals without claiming infallible detection, including clear actual sender address vs display name, suspicious-link/attachment warnings, executable attachment restrictions and provider/header authentication information such as SPF/DKIM/DMARC results where available.
Read receipts MUST require user/provider policy approval and MUST NOT be automatically sent solely because a sender requested one.
Provider spam/junk systems SHOULD be used when available; generic accounts may use local classification/rules. Mark Junk/Not Junk MUST update provider state when supported.
OpenPGP, S/MIME and advanced mail features
Where supported by the selected mature donor source and target platform, Mail MUST preserve applicable OpenPGP and S/MIME signing/encryption workflows, certificate/key management and message verification/decryption behaviour unless a documented parity exception exists.
Advanced message inspection MUST expose message source/raw MIME, headers, Internet Message-ID and provider/debug details without making these advanced controls dominate the default reading experience.
Print and export
Messages/threads MUST support print and supported export such as PDF, .eml and applicable text/HTML forms. Export MUST preserve attachments only when the selected format/workflow explicitly supports them.
Mail API
9to1.Mail.ListAccounts();
9to1.Mail.GetAccount(accountID);
9to1.Mail.Sync(accountID?);
9to1.Mail.SyncFolder(accountID, folderID);
9to1.Mail.ListFolders(accountID);
9to1.Mail.ListMessages(query);
9to1.Mail.GetMessage(messageID);
9to1.Mail.GetThread(threadID);
9to1.Mail.MarkRead(messageID, value);
9to1.Mail.Star(messageID, value);
9to1.Mail.Move(messageID, destination);
9to1.Mail.Archive(messageID);
9to1.Mail.Delete(messageID);
9to1.Mail.Restore(messageID);
9to1.Mail.Draft.Create(config);
9to1.Mail.Draft.Update(draftID, patch, expectedRevision?);
9to1.Mail.Draft.Delete(draftID);
9to1.Mail.Send(draftID);
9to1.Mail.ScheduleSend(draftID, time, executionPolicy?);
9to1.Mail.CancelQueued(messageID);
9to1.Mail.Reply(messageID, config?);
9to1.Mail.Forward(messageID, config?);
9to1.Mail.Attachment.Get(attachmentID);
9to1.Mail.Attachment.SaveToFiles(attachmentID, destination);
9to1.Mail.Search(query);
9to1.Mail.Rules.List();
9to1.Mail.Rules.Create(rule);
9to1.Mail.Changes.Subscribe(accountID?, cursor?);
These are minimum canonical entry points. Every additional user-visible Mail operation and preserved donor capability MUST have an equivalent typed API/domain action under the global API-parity rule.
Failure behaviour
Mail MUST return structured failures including AccountNotFound, AuthenticationRequired, ProviderUnavailable, ProviderCapabilityUnsupported, Offline, SyncFailed, MessageNotFound, ThreadNotFound, DraftConflict, SendFailed, SendRejected, AttachmentUnavailable, MailboxQuotaExceeded, RateLimited, PermissionDenied, InvalidRecipient, EncryptionKeyUnavailable, CertificateError and structured partial bulk outcomes in addition to the global error contract.
Platform behaviour
Native Windows/9to1-OS Mail MUST support configured local caching/offline behaviour and Home-integrated notifications/files/model services. Web Mail uses authenticated server/provider APIs and the same canonical account/message identities where available, but browser storage/offline capabilities MUST be capability-negotiated rather than assumed identical to native.
Acceptance requirements
Mail is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
The final UI passes dedicated visual QA for a cohesive modern 9to1 CUI shell with responsive pane behaviour, clean message/compose surfaces, consistent spacing/typography and no exposed legacy donor UI.
Applicable mature donor email capabilities are accounted for in the donor-parity manifest independently from visual design.
At least Gmail/Google, Outlook/Microsoft and generic IMAP+SMTP accounts can coexist with Unified Inbox without provider-semantics loss.
Gmail-style label semantics and generic IMAP folder semantics remain distinguishable and correct.
Incremental push/IDLE/provider sync updates a connected mailbox without complete rescans for ordinary changes.
Offline cached mail is readable and queued mutations survive app/device restart then reconcile on reconnect.
Draft autosave/recovery preserves content and surfaces provider/local conflicts rather than overwriting silently.
Offline send enters Outbox/Queued and send failure remains visible/retryable rather than being reported Sent.
Client-side Undo Send cancels before provider submission and stops presenting undo once sending is irreversible.
Scheduled send accurately identifies provider/cloud/device execution semantics and does not imply guarantees the selected executor cannot provide.
Attachments can be opened/saved through Files and Attach from Files works with authorised local/9to1 Drive content.
Search works across the defined fields and saved smart views do not duplicate messages.
Remote email HTML/script cannot execute trusted app code and remote-image tracking obeys privacy controls.
OpenPGP/S/MIME donor-supported behaviour works or has an explicit scoped parity exception.
The AI bar can summarise/draft against explicit context while respecting local/cloud privacy policy.
AI cannot bypass Mail.Send permission simply because it drafted a message.
Provider reauthentication/revocation does not erase valid cached messages/drafts.
Home notification deep links open the exact intended message/thread/account.
Home/Dulche service restart produces a recoverable/degraded state without mailbox database corruption.
Core UI operations and provider actions have equivalent typed API coverage.
Games
Product role and ambition
9to1 Games is the native CUI game-development, real-time 3D creation, modelling and rendering environment. It is not merely a launcher and it is not the same product as Play. Games is where users build games, interactive worlds, real-time experiences, 2D/3D scenes, models, materials, animations and rendered content. Play remains the structured human/Agent game framework.
Games MUST be based on a maintained fork of Godot as its primary game-engine donor and MUST preserve mature applicable engine functionality unless this specification explicitly replaces it with a 9to1-native equivalent. Donor parity is a floor rather than a ceiling: the purpose of the fork is to produce a materially more capable, more intuitive and more integrated creation environment rather than only re-skinning Godot.
Games MUST also integrate a maintained Blender-derived modelling/rendering toolset deeply enough that modelling feels like part of the same product rather than an external export/import workflow. Because 9to1 is substantially open source, implementation MAY integrate Blender-derived code as deeply as is technically useful while preserving all applicable licence/source-distribution obligations. The donor-parity/source manifest MUST identify the exact Godot and Blender revisions, licences, modified components and redistribution obligations used by a release.
Games MUST expose at least two first-class workspaces over the same canonical project/assets: Development and Creation/Rendering. Development prioritises scene graph, gameplay, scripts, debugging, profiling, networking, UI and build/export. Creation/Rendering prioritises modelling, sculpting, UV, materials, texture work, rigging, animation, simulations, lighting, cameras, high-quality rendering and related asset workflows. A user MUST be able to use Creation/Rendering without building a game.
CUI-native editor
The user-facing editor MUST be rebuilt as a coherent 9to1 CUI experience rather than exposing donor-native editor chrome as the final interface. Existing mature donor capability MAY remain behind the shell, but navigation, inspector, asset browser, scene graph, editors, dialogs, settings, errors and workflows MUST follow 9to1 interaction conventions.
Games MUST host the normal persistent floating Dulche AI bar. The AI bar receives only authorised project/editor state and MUST be able to reason over semantic scene, script, component, material, animation, profiler and error data through typed Games APIs. It MUST NOT rely on generic Computer Use to manipulate the Games editor when a typed Games action exists.
The Godot UI authoring workflow MUST be upgraded/rebuilt around the canonical CUI Visual Builder. Game HUDs, menus, overlays, dialogue, inventories, maps, settings, responsive layouts and other game UI MUST use the same high-quality visual layout concepts and reusable components as CUI while compiling/running efficiently inside Games. Game UI remains part of the canonical game scene/component model and MUST NOT become a disconnected design-only artifact.
Canonical scene graph and purposeful components
Games MUST preserve a powerful scene/node graph foundation while providing higher-level purposeful components for common game concepts. Stable SceneID, EntityID, NodeID, ComponentID, ResourceID, AssetID and ProjectID identities MUST be used; mutable names/paths are not canonical identity.
The scene graph MUST support ordinary low-level engine nodes for expert use and high-level purpose-built entities/components for rapid development. Examples include Player Character, Vehicle, Camera Rig, Door, Interactive Object, Collectible, Spawn Point, Checkpoint, Trigger Volume, Dialogue Actor, NPC, Enemy, Weapon, Inventory, Quest, Save Point, Water Body, Landscape, Foliage, Destructible Object, Audio Zone, Lighting Rig, UI Screen/HUD, Multiplayer Spawn and Navigation Area.
Purposeful components MUST have real runtime semantics, typed APIs, inspectors, events, extension points and Dulche understanding. They MUST NOT be decorative prefab labels over unrelated scripts.
Games MUST favour composition. Complex built-ins such as Player Character or Car SHOULD be composed from inspectable native primitives plus first-party C# gameplay components rather than implemented as one opaque monolithic class.
Shared graph infrastructure with Automations
Games and Automations MUST share the same canonical node-graph editor/data infrastructure and backend concepts for GraphID, NodeID, typed ports, typed connections, groups, comments, subgraphs, search, selection, snapping, minimap, copy/paste, undo/redo, versioning, validation, keyboard accessibility, semantic API access and execution/debug visualisation.
Sharing the graph infrastructure MUST NOT force all graphs through one execution runtime. Each GraphType registers its own legal node families, compiler/runtime adapter and semantics. Automation graphs execute through the automation runtime; gameplay visual scripts through the Games runtime; material/shader graphs through the rendering compiler; animation/state graphs through the animation runtime; procedural world graphs through the generation runtime.
Games MUST expose only context-relevant nodes by default. A shader graph MUST NOT show Send Email merely because Automations uses the same graph infrastructure. Cross-domain nodes require an explicit compatible bridge.
Visual gameplay graphs MUST interoperate with C# and C++. Eligible C# or C++ functions/events explicitly exposed to Games SHOULD be callable/observable as graph nodes/events without requiring hand-written graph wrappers.
C# first-class language and mixed-language projects
C# is the canonical first-class scripting/gameplay language for Games. Documentation, templates, autocomplete, refactoring, debugging, profiler integration, hot-reload support where safe, generated APIs, examples and Dulche coding assistance MUST default to C#.
GDScript MUST NOT be exposed as a supported public Games development language. Donor language infrastructure MAY remain internally where unavoidable during migration, but user projects and canonical Games documentation MUST NOT require or promote GDScript.
C++ MUST remain available for low-level, engine-extension, rendering, platform, performance-critical, unusual memory/layout or other systems work where C# is inappropriate. The engine SHOULD continually minimise the amount of low-level work developers need to write themselves.
A Games project MUST support C# and C++ simultaneously. The user MUST NOT have to choose one project language. C# and C++ MUST operate over the same canonical scene/entity/component/resource model and may call deliberately exposed functionality across the language boundary.
Games SHOULD generate routine interop/binding glue. Normal developers MUST NOT be expected to hand-write P/Invoke declarations, ABI wrappers, pointer-marshalling layers, lifetime glue or duplicated type conversions merely to call a supported exposed C++ component from C#.
Common engine types such as vectors, transforms, entities, components, assets, materials, textures and scenes MUST have canonical interoperable representations. Native/managed ownership and lifetime rules MUST be explicit at the runtime level while remaining safely automatic for ordinary high-level use.
Intuitive API design contract
The public Games API MUST describe game intent rather than mirror internal engine plumbing. Where an operation has a clear domain action, the high-level API MUST expose that action directly.
For example, a user-facing API such as Object.SetX(value) is preferred over requiring a developer to traverse a chain such as Object.X.Position.Persistent(). Similar simple verbs SHOULD include SetPosition, MoveTo, Rotate, Show, Hide, Enable, Disable, Open, Close, Play, Stop, Spawn, Destroy, Give, Take, Attach and Detach where semantically appropriate.
Public APIs MUST use consistent names, strong typing, sensible defaults, concise parameters and direct discoverability. Internally complex operations such as replication, authority resolution, component traversal or persistence SHOULD be handled by Games when the desired intent is unambiguous.
Advanced low-level APIs MAY expose explicit replication, authority, memory, rendering and engine primitives for expert use. Their existence MUST NOT make low-level plumbing the normal or documented path for ordinary game logic.
API design quality MUST include human and AI interpretability: a competent developer or model SHOULD normally be able to infer the purpose of a high-level operation from its name, target type and typed parameters without reading engine implementation details.
Shared and individual state semantics
Games MUST use shared and individual as the canonical high-level state/replication qualifiers. The aliases shar and indiv MUST be accepted as equivalent shorthand where the Games language/parser supports these declarations.
shared/shar means one canonical state is shared across the relevant game/session audience and replicated according to the object's authority policy. individual/indiv means the state is resolved independently for the relevant player/entity.
The shared/individual model applies consistently where meaningful, including UI state, gameplay variables, progression, objectives, settings and keybind definitions. It MUST replace the earlier public/private naming for Games state scope.
Example intent: GetEntity(Player) { UI.Show(ui, individual); } updates only that player's corresponding UI state. GetEntity(Player) { UI.Show(ui, shared); } updates the shared state seen by the applicable audience. The runtime handles the required identity, replication and join/reconciliation plumbing.
The API SHOULD infer natural scope when it is unambiguous so developers do not repeatedly specify individual for obviously per-player state. Explicit qualifiers remain available when the developer needs to override/default the behaviour.
The high-level model MUST avoid forcing developers to maintain maps keyed by PlayerID merely to represent ordinary per-player state. Games retains stable internal identities and advanced maps/collections remain available for genuinely custom logic.
Multiplayer/replication intent
For ordinary gameplay, developers SHOULD specify desired state, ownership and visibility rather than manually implement RPC direction, player-ID dictionaries, replication callbacks, joining-player reconstruction, local/server copies and reconciliation.
High-level operations such as Door.Open(shared), UI.Show(LevelComplete, individual), Inventory.Give(Key, individual) or a shared world-state update SHOULD compile/route into the appropriate authoritative replication mechanism.
Games MUST still expose advanced networking primitives for specialised games, but high-level APIs are authoritative for common development and MUST remain deterministic, inspectable and debuggable.
Declarative keybind system
Games MUST provide a canonical human-readable keybinding definition file, provisionally named keybinds.csmap, that is understood by the editor, runtime, C# APIs, visual graphs, Dulche and generated settings UI.
Keybind definitions MUST be semantic rather than hard-wired gameplay code. A developer defines an action such as Jump, Crouch or Movement and then maps supported keyboard/controller/touch inputs to it.
shared Keybind means the declared binding is common for the applicable game/profile scope. individual Keybind means each player may have a separately resolved/remappable binding. shar and indiv are accepted shorthand.
Games SHOULD support readable controller-layout names rather than forcing numeric button indices, including semantic/positional forms such as Controller.Letters.Down, Controller.Letters.Left, bumpers, triggers, D-pad, LeftStick and RightStick. Platform-specific glyph/display mapping is handled by the engine.
Composite input shorthand MUST be supported. A declaration equivalent to shared Keybind Movement { Keyboard(WASD); Controller(LeftStick); } MUST produce one typed movement input rather than four unrelated actions. Digital WASD and analogue stick values resolve through one semantic Movement binding.
Keybind consumption MUST be simple. Event.KeyPress(BindingName) { ... } is the canonical intent for listening to a binding press. Corresponding release/hold/value-change/input events SHOULD follow the same readable event family.
The input subsystem MUST resolve device hot-swap, keyboard/controller/touch source, player ownership, remapping, persistence and appropriate input value types without requiring ordinary gameplay code to poll physical devices.
Individual/remappable bindings MUST have ready-made CUI settings components for rebinding, conflict detection, reset-to-default, clearing, device-specific display and per-player persistence. Duplicate bindings MAY be legal; conflicts in the same active context should warn rather than be silently rejected.
The system SHOULD support input contexts, chords/combinations and typed analogue/gesture inputs without requiring developers to build timing/device-selection infrastructure from scratch.
Prebuilt object and gameplay library
Games MUST ship an optional, substantial first-party library of production-usable drag-and-drop entities, components and complete gameplay systems so creators can begin with working mechanics rather than blank scenes.
The library MUST include at least a configurable basic/stick-man-style player character with full movement, crouch, jump, sprint and swimming support; starter vehicles including a car, plane, boat and submarine; environmental systems including water and lava; and common interactive/world primitives.
Starter content MUST be fully usable without opening its implementation, while remaining inspectable, extensible and replaceable. It MUST NOT be a set of disconnected demos or opaque sample projects.
The standard Player Character inspector MUST expose substantial high-level configuration rather than only speed/jump toggles. It SHOULD expose at least Movement Speed, Acceleration, Sprint Speed, Limited Stamina, Stamina Level/Maximum, per-action stamina consumption for walking/sprinting/jumping/crouching/swimming where applicable, Stamina Replenish Delay, Stamina Replenish rate, Crouch Speed, Jump Height, Air Control, Can Sprint, Can Crouch, Can Jump and Can Swim, plus appropriate advanced movement/collision settings.
Inspector sections MUST progressively reveal dependent settings. Disabling Limited Stamina SHOULD hide/de-emphasise irrelevant stamina controls; disabling Crouch SHOULD collapse crouch-only parameters. An Advanced disclosure SHOULD expose expert parameters without turning the default inspector into an unstructured wall of fields.
Starter vehicles MUST similarly expose meaningful tuning such as acceleration, maximum speed, braking, steering response, traction, suspension/buoyancy/aerodynamic values and feature toggles appropriate to the vehicle type.
Water SHOULD expose working swimming/buoyancy/current/wave/underwater behaviour and integrate automatically with compatible Player/vehicle components. Lava SHOULD expose fluid-like behaviour where desired plus damage/ignition/heat/visual properties. Built-in environment systems MUST interoperate through shared typed contracts rather than custom one-off scripts.
The library SHOULD also include reusable systems such as health/damage, inventory, interaction, quests, dialogue, checkpoints, save/load, respawning, teams, rounds, scoring, racing, pickups, simple AI/navigation and common multiplayer/lobby/spectator features.
Optional first-party C# feature components
Each applicable built-in entity MUST expose a contextual catalogue of optional first-party C# feature components that the creator can enable through simple checkboxes/toggles. These are normal editable C# components built on the same public Games component API, not privileged hidden native features.
For Player Character, examples MUST include optional components such as Double Jump and Ragdoll Properties/behaviour, and SHOULD include other appropriate features such as Fall Damage, Mantling, Climbing, Sliding, Wall Running, Dash, Stamina, Oxygen, Footsteps, Head Bob, Camera Shake, Interaction, Inventory, Health, Regeneration, Knockback, Swimming and other mature starter behaviours.
Enabling an optional component MUST add/activate the corresponding C# component and reveal its configurable properties. Double Jump, for example, SHOULD be able to expose maximum jumps, second-jump height, reset rules, stamina cost and contextual restrictions without requiring the creator to open code.
Ragdoll SHOULD be able to expose activation conditions, body/joint behaviour, collision, recovery and replication-related settings while relying on native skeleton/physics primitives underneath.
Native engine components SHOULD be reserved for fundamental high-performance primitives and engine facilities such as transforms, identity, core rendering, low-level physics/collision, audio primitives, input routing, replication primitives, navigation and animation/runtime infrastructure. Higher-level gameplay behaviours SHOULD prefer editable C# when performance/architecture permits.
First-party C# components MUST expose source code to the project/user according to the 9to1 open-source distribution model and MUST be usable unchanged, parameter-tuned, extended, duplicated/forked or replaced by developer code.
Custom developer C# components MUST participate in the same inspector and discovery model as first-party components. A developer-defined component compatible with Player SHOULD be able to appear in the same contextual component picker with automatically generated CUI settings for eligible exposed properties.
Component metadata MUST support dependencies, compatibility, stable identity/version, display name/category, exposed settings, events/actions and migration information. When enabling a component requires another component, Games SHOULD offer to enable the dependency rather than leave a silently broken configuration.
Disabling an optional component SHOULD preserve its configuration by default so re-enabling restores it. Removing/deleting the component is a separate explicit operation.
Component inspector generation
C# components MUST be able to declare user-editable settings through concise metadata/attributes. Games MUST generate a polished CUI inspector automatically for standard supported property types rather than requiring every component author to build a bespoke editor panel.
Metadata SHOULD support user-facing name, description/help, units, numeric ranges/steps, enum choices, grouping, advanced disclosure, conditional visibility, asset/entity pickers, validation and safe defaults.
Auto-generated inspectors MUST remain overrideable/extensible when a component genuinely requires a specialised editor.
Component events and state
Reusable components MUST publish semantic typed events and inspectable state. For example, a character component SHOULD be able to expose events such as Jump, SprintStart, SprintEnd, StaminaEmpty, EnterWater and LeaveWater plus readable state such as IsSprinting, IsCrouching, IsSwimming and Stamina.
Consumers MUST be able to subscribe through C#, visual graphs and Dulche-compatible typed actions without inspecting private implementation fields.
Component versioning and project safety
First-party library components MUST be versioned. Existing projects MUST NOT silently change behaviour merely because the globally installed library was updated. Projects MAY pin component versions and receive explicit migration/upgrade flows with change previews where practical.
Creators MUST be able to fork a first-party component into project-owned code. Once forked, it becomes project-owned and MUST NOT be overwritten by later library updates.
Rendering and graphics engine
Games MUST invest in a high-end modern rendering stack capable of producing visually exceptional games and rendered scenes rather than treating rendering as donor parity only.
The engine SHOULD independently implement capabilities comparable in outcome to modern virtualised-geometry and dynamic-global-illumination systems without copying proprietary source code, algorithms that are not legally available, trademarks as product features or confidential implementation detail.
Rendering goals SHOULD include highly scalable detailed geometry, automated/low-touch LOD handling, GPU-driven rendering where beneficial, visibility/occlusion systems, geometry streaming/clustering as appropriate, dynamic global illumination, indirect lighting, reflections, modern shadows, temporal reconstruction/upscaling, large-world rendering, physically based materials and predictable profiling/quality controls.
Creators SHOULD be able to achieve high geometric detail with much less manual LOD authoring than conventional pipelines while retaining explicit expert control when needed.
Every advanced renderer feature MUST expose truthful hardware/platform capability detection, quality fallbacks, performance diagnostics and deterministic project settings. Unsupported hardware MUST degrade gracefully rather than silently producing broken scenes.
Landscape, world and procedural tools
Games MUST provide first-class landscape/world creation rather than requiring an external terrain package for normal use.
Landscape tooling SHOULD include sculpting, smoothing, erosion-style operations, heightmaps, layers, splines, roads, rivers, lakes/oceans, biome painting, foliage, procedural scattering, world/region streaming, large-world coordinates, landscape collision/navigation generation and runtime deformation where supported.
Procedural world generation MUST be able to use the shared graph editor infrastructure through a dedicated generation GraphType with terrain/foliage/geometry/scatter/environment nodes and a specialised generation runtime.
World tools MUST integrate with the canonical scene graph, materials, physics, navigation, Files/assets, Dulche and build/export pipeline.
Material and shader tools
Games MUST provide a strong native material/shader authoring environment using the shared graph infrastructure with a dedicated material/shader GraphType and renderer/compiler backend.
The material system SHOULD support reusable functions/subgraphs, instances, parameters, layers, procedural inputs, normal/displacement workflows, physically based shading, transparency, subsurface/clearcoat/anisotropy where the renderer supports them, decals, terrain materials, preview scenes and performance/complexity diagnostics.
The beginner path MUST support high-quality materials without requiring shader source code. Experts MUST retain access to lower-level shader code and advanced render hooks where supported.
Integrated Blender-derived modelling
Games MUST provide built-in professional modelling tools derived from Blender and redesigned/integrated for the Games workflow rather than behaving as a loosely launched external application.
The modelling environment SHOULD cover mesh modelling, selection modes, transform/extrude/bevel/inset workflows, modifiers, sculpting, retopology, UV editing, texture/vertex painting, rigging, weight painting, animation, procedural/geometry workflows, simulations and high-quality rendering/compositing capabilities where appropriate.
CUI interaction and contextual tooling SHOULD make common modelling tasks substantially easier to discover and perform than raw donor workflows while preserving advanced depth for expert users.
A selected scene asset SHOULD be editable in the modelling workspace and returned to the same canonical asset/scene relationship without manual export/import round trips. Changes MUST flow through the normal asset revision/undo/source-control model.
Creation/Rendering mode MUST be useful as a standalone modelling/rendering application. A user MUST be able to create, model, light, animate and render an asset/scene even when the project contains no playable game logic.
Asset pipeline and cross-app integration
Games MUST integrate with Files as the canonical 9to1 file/project substrate where applicable and SHOULD integrate cleanly with Picture, Wave and other media/creation apps for textures, images, audio/video and generated assets without unnecessary duplicate exports.
Assets MUST have stable identity, source/import settings, derived/cache state and dependency tracking. Reimport MUST preserve intentional scene/component references wherever possible.
Stack/Dev integration SHOULD provide source-control-aware project workflows, diffs where semantically possible, branches and code review without corrupting binary/derived asset state. Terminal MUST expose supported Godot/Games CLI/build/export workflows.
Dulche in Games
Dulche MUST operate semantically through Games APIs and project data. It SHOULD be able to answer questions such as why a character falls through a floor, create or modify typed scene components, tune exposed parameters, create scripts, diagnose errors, analyse profiler output, modify materials/graphs, assemble starter systems and perform authorised project edits.
Dulche MUST prefer existing first-party/native components over generating redundant custom implementations when they satisfy the user's request. If a user asks for a third-person character that can sprint, crouch and swim, Dulche SHOULD assemble/configure the applicable existing components rather than reinventing those systems in new code.
AI-generated Games changes MUST remain inspectable through normal scene/script/graph diffs and undo/revision mechanisms. AI assistance MUST NOT create hidden state that cannot be reproduced through supported project structures.
Build, run, debug and export
Games MUST preserve mature Godot-derived project run/debug/export capability and improve it where required for the 9to1 workflow. Running a game, running the current scene, attaching a debugger, breakpoints, errors, remote scene inspection, profiler data and platform export MUST remain first-class.
The editor MUST clearly separate editor state from running-game state while allowing safe live inspection and supported hot-edit/hot-reload behaviour.
Export targets SHOULD preserve applicable mature donor platform coverage subject to the selected donor revision, platform SDK/licence availability and 9to1 release support. Unsupported export targets MUST be reported truthfully rather than exposed as fake buttons.
Relationship with Play
Games and Play are separate. Games builds and runs normal games/interactive content. Play governs structured human/Dulche-Agent matches, contestants, scoring, judging, visibility and game actions.
A Games project MAY explicitly expose a typed Play-compatible interface so Dulche Agents can participate through purpose-built game actions/state. Generic Computer Use MUST NOT be used as a hidden fallback for controlling arbitrary game executables, anti-cheat surfaces or unsupported games.
Games API families
Games MUST expose typed API families for projects, scenes/entities/nodes/components, resources/assets, transforms, gameplay state, input/keybinds, graphs, UI/CUI Visual Builder, materials, animation, physics, navigation, audio, rendering, landscapes/worlds, modelling integration, build/run/debug/export and component-library discovery/installation/configuration.
High-level APIs and advanced APIs MUST remain clearly layered. The existence of a low-level API MUST NOT allow implementation agents to omit the intuitive high-level operation required by this specification.
Every mutation MUST use stable identities, structured results, revision/conflict semantics and the global Home permission/audit model where actions cross normal trust boundaries.
Failure and recovery
Games MUST preserve project integrity across editor crashes, failed imports, failed builds, hot-reload errors, graph compilation errors, component upgrade failures and interrupted modelling/render operations. Autosave/recovery MUST NOT silently overwrite a newer valid source revision.
Errors MUST identify the relevant ProjectID/SceneID/EntityID/ComponentID/GraphID/AssetID and provide actionable context. High-level APIs MUST return structured errors rather than swallowing engine exceptions.
Component/library upgrades, donor migrations and project format migrations MUST be transactional or recoverable. A failed migration MUST leave the previous valid project state recoverable.
Acceptance requirements
Games is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage proves at least: a real maintained Godot-derived engine/editor; native CUI rebuild; Development and standalone Creation/Rendering workflows; deeply integrated Blender-derived modelling; CUI Visual Builder game UI; canonical scene graph and purposeful components; shared node infrastructure with Automations plus specialised graph runtimes; first-class C#; absence of public GDScript dependency; simultaneous C#/C++ interoperability; intuitive high-level APIs; shared/individual plus shar/indiv semantics; declarative keybinds and Event.KeyPress-style semantic input; robust per-player remapping; configurable starter Player with detailed movement/stamina/swim controls; contextual optional C# components including Double Jump and Ragdoll; custom C# component inspector integration; starter car/plane/boat/submarine; water/lava environment systems; reusable gameplay systems; high-end rendering; strong landscape/procedural tools; strong materials/shaders; semantic Dulche operation; safe project/version migration; mature run/debug/export; and explicit separation from Play.
AI Apps
Spaces
Product role
9-1 Spaces is the conversational, research, study and agentic-work environment across the 9to1 ecosystem. A Space is a persistent context and behaviour container with stable identity, conversations, sources, model policy, memory policy, connected capabilities and permissions. Spaces operate on canonical app entities through their owning typed APIs and MUST NOT duplicate mutable 9to1 artifacts merely to make them conversational.
Spaces MUST support cross-app actions including Write document mutation, Board/embedded-Canvas editing, Data updates, Planner mutation, Maps route creation, media/project-file actions, Stack operations and Automation coordination whenever the target app exposes the corresponding API. Consequential mutations inherit the target action’s permission/review contract. Spaces MUST NOT fall back to raw UI automation when a typed action exists.
Built-in Space types
The built-in first-party Space types are Chat, Study, Tasks, Agent, Shopping, Research, Translate and Experiences. These are distinct product environments with protected first-party behaviour and UI; they are not merely system-prompt presets.
Chat is the broad general-purpose conversational environment for ordinary questions, app actions, files, web research where enabled, shared objects, tools and agentic work.
Study is the learning environment and MUST support source-backed explanation, topics, practice questions, quizzes, flashcards, progress/weak-area tracking and review scheduling. Study progress MUST be based on recorded interactions/answers rather than inferred solely because material was shown to the user.
Tasks is the goal-oriented work environment and MUST expose structured objective, plan/steps, current step, dependencies, blockers, approvals, outputs, status and run state. Tasks are individual work items/runs and are distinct from Automations, which own recurring/event-triggered execution.
Agent is the environment for interacting with and supervising persistent 9to1 Agents. It MUST surface the selected Agent identity, state, runs, relevant memory/tools and Action Graph access while preserving the Agent definition and permissions owned by the Agents/AI Studio/Dulche contracts.
Shopping is a product-discovery/comparison environment for requirements, candidates, research, saved items and purchase-related context. It MUST preserve source/provenance and MUST NOT treat generated claims as product facts.
Research is the deeper source-oriented research environment for research plans, source sets, citations/provenance, findings, notes and structured outputs. It MUST make source scope and outside-web access explicit.
Translate is the conversational translation/localisation environment backed by Dulche Translate. It uses the normal Space conversation, context, sources, Plugins, Skills, Agents, memory, model policy and permissions rather than a special two-box translator UI. Its translation-specific persistent control is the selected target-language set shown immediately above the standard Space chatbar; there is no separate Translate-specific context row because current artifact/selection/files/sources and semantic app context use the normal Spaces context architecture. Translate supports one or many target languages, conversational refinement, structured Translation Sets/variants, artifact-aware translation and authorised agentic follow-up actions through normal typed owning-app APIs.
For conversational translation into multiple target languages, each language variant MUST render as its own assistant speech bubble rather than being collapsed into one combined multi-language response card. The language/locale name is shown directly above the corresponding bubble, for example French above the French translation bubble, Spanish above the Spanish bubble and German above the German bubble. The bubbles remain siblings of the same TranslationSetID/request so retry, edit, regenerate, apply or publish operations may target one language without losing the others.
Experiences is the conversational stateful environment for open-ended interactive experiences such as roleplay, simulations, interactive stories, mysteries, fictional worlds, scenario training and other AI-driven experiences that do not require the formal contestant/scoring structure of Play. It uses the normal Space conversation, context, Agents, Skills, Plugins, model policy, permissions, memory and Generative UI architecture.
Every active Experience MUST maintain canonical structured experience state rather than treating generated narrative prose as the sole source of truth. Experience state MAY include world/scene/time, characters, relationships, inventory/resources, objectives, flags, timeline, hidden information, rules and typed domain-specific state. When the narrative says a state-changing event occurred, the corresponding canonical state transition MUST be committed before future turns rely on it.
Experiences MAY use persistent Dulche Agents for autonomous characters/roles that genuinely benefit from independent identity, memory or goals, while lightweight characters MAY remain scoped experience actors/state rather than becoming permanent Den Agents. Agent knowledge and private/hidden state MUST be filtered by the Experience visibility policy so one character cannot access information it has not learned.
Experiences SHOULD support checkpoints, rewind and branching. A branch combines the conversation branch with the matching Experience-state revision so trying a different decision does not mutate the original timeline. Rewind/branch of simulated state MUST NOT pretend to undo real external side effects that already occurred through authorised Plugins/actions.
Experiences MAY expose maps, inventories, evidence, character panels, timelines, objectives, cards or other interactive elements through safe CUI/Generative UI. The normal conversation remains the primary interaction surface; generated UI is a structured representation of canonical Experience state, not a separate hidden game runtime.
Experiences MAY launch or embed a formal Play Match when the scenario requires a structured competition, and Play MAY offer Continue in Experiences for an open-ended continuation. Experience state and Play Match state remain distinct canonical entities rather than being silently merged.
User-created Spaces and nesting
The sidebar does not expose a ninth Custom type. Users create user-defined Spaces through + New Space and manage the hierarchy through Edit Spaces. User-created Spaces have SpaceOrigin = UserCreated and receive the full Space graph editor described below; built-in first-party Spaces have SpaceOrigin = BuiltIn and expose only the protected Events & Extensions editor.
Spaces MAY be nested through ParentSpaceID to create logical hierarchies. Nesting MUST preserve each Space’s stable identity and MUST NOT imply permission escalation. Child inheritance of sources, connected apps, model policy, memory, Skills, Plugins or Agents must be explicit/inspectable; a child cannot regain a capability or permission explicitly denied by a parent/security policy.
Edit Spaces MUST support reorder, nest/unnest, rename, icon, sharing, inheritance configuration, duplicate, archive/delete/recover and other structural management without exposing protected first-party internal implementation.
Sidebar and navigation
The Spaces sidebar is scoped around the currently selected Space. Its top control MUST display the currently selected Space and provide a Space switcher when activated; an adjacent overflow control provides quick actions for that Space.
Immediately below, the sidebar MUST expose the built-in Space destinations Chat, Study, Tasks, Agent, Shopping, Research, Translate and Experiences, followed by New Chat, then Space-relevant options. A divider separates the persistent + New Space and Edit Spaces controls.
Space-relevant options are typed capabilities/surfaces appropriate to the selected Space and may include Sources, Files/context, Topics, Progress, Runs, Findings, Tools, Agents, Approvals, Settings or custom sidebar items. The set is context-sensitive but MUST be deterministic and inspectable, not arbitrary hidden AI-generated navigation.
New Chat creates a new conversation inside the currently selected Space. It MUST NOT create another Space. Recent/pinned conversations may appear within the selected Space’s Chat/conversation surface without turning the global sidebar into an unbounded cross-Space history list.
Plugins — custom sidebar elements and per-Space visibility
Plugins MUST support contributing custom sidebar elements. An element MUST be able to open an arbitrary configured page/URL, an authorised app surface, an authored CUI page or a generative page, or invoke an Automation or another declared authorised action. Navigation and action-triggering behaviour MUST be explicit. Arbitrary pages remain subject to the existing safe rendering, origin, permissions and external-navigation rules; this capability does not authorise unrestricted code execution.
For each Plugin, the user MUST be able to select which Spaces display its sidebar elements. This selection MUST be inspectable, editable and persisted using stable Plugin, Space and SidebarItem identities. An excluded Space MUST NOT display that Plugin's sidebar contributions merely because the Plugin is installed globally. Sidebar visibility is distinct from permission to execute the Plugin or access Space data; it MUST NOT silently change either.
Attaching a Plugin MUST now be the primary method of supplying custom sidebar elements in custom Spaces. Ordinary Plugin-provided sidebar elements MUST NOT require users to construct a built-in Automation or Space lifecycle graph solely to load the element.
The existing built-in automation/Events & Extensions/full Space graph mechanisms for loading, showing and controlling custom sidebar elements MUST remain supported for enhanced and combined workflows. Plugin and graph routes MUST share the existing sidebar identity, ownership, lifecycle and rendering contracts, preserving AppSurface, CUI and GenerativeUI support. They MUST NOT duplicate the same contribution or replace protected first-party sidebar items. Disabling or detaching a Plugin MUST stop its active contributions without leaving executable orphan actions or deleting unrelated Space content.
Plugin sidebar — supplied concept mockup clarification
The supplied sidebar concept mockup is the applicable visual reference. The relevant example is the My Homework row immediately below New chat and above the divider; the earlier expanded-composer screenshot is not the sidebar reference.
Plugin-contributed sidebar elements MUST support this ordinary navigation-row presentation: an icon on the left, a readable text label beside it, and alignment, spacing and interaction treatment consistent with neighbouring sidebar items. A custom entry can sit directly beneath New Chat within the selected Space's permitted custom-sidebar area; it MUST NOT require opening a separate Plugin panel simply to reach the entry.
The screenshot is a concept reference for the custom entry's presentation and placement, not a requirement to copy its project names, conversation history, colours or complete sidebar structure. Existing protected navigation and Space-scoping requirements remain in force. The Plugin's per-Space visibility selection still determines where its entries appear, and the existing automation/Space-graph route remains supported.
Plugin sidebar API and acceptance
Extend the canonical Plugin and Spaces APIs for contribution registration, configuration, removal, per-Space visibility and authorised action dispatch; UI and API MUST use the same stable SidebarItemID and ownership/lifecycle rules. Test Plugin-defined URL/page, authored CUI, generative-page and Automation actions; persistence after restart; visibility only in selected Spaces; keyboard navigation and accessible names; and safe disable/detach without orphan actions or deletion of unrelated content. The original automation/Events & Extensions/Space-graph contribution route MUST continue to work, including combined workflows without duplicate contributions. The Plugin manifest and Builder MUST expose these contribution contracts rather than creating a second sidebar registry.
Canonical Space and conversation model
Space MUST contain at least SpaceID, SpaceOrigin, built-in type where applicable, Name, Icon?, ParentSpaceID?, owner/scope, instructions/configuration, model policy, context/source policy, memory policy, capability bindings, permissions, created/modified timestamps and revision metadata. SpaceID is stable across rename, nesting and UI ordering.
Conversation MUST contain at least ConversationID, SpaceID, Title, CreatedAt, ModifiedAt, ActiveBranchID, optional model override and revision metadata. Messages MUST have stable MessageID, author principal/role, branch/parent relationship, timestamp, content blocks, model/provider provenance where AI-generated and tool/action references where applicable.
Conversation branching and history
Editing an earlier message, regenerating a response or branching from a message MUST preserve prior history as a conversation branch rather than silently destroying descendants. Users MUST be able to return to earlier branches and identify which branch is active.
Tool calls and consequential actions already executed remain historical facts attached to their original run/branch and MUST NOT be retroactively undone merely because text was regenerated. New branches start from the selected historical conversational state but respect current external entity revisions/permissions.
Stop and resume
While a response/run is active, Spaces MUST expose Stop. After the user stops a resumable response, the stopped response remains in place and its primary control becomes a Play/Resume button. Resume continues the same user-visible RequestID/run from persisted execution state rather than behaving like Regenerate.
Request states MUST distinguish at least Queued, Running, Stopping, Stopped, Completed, Failed, Cancelled and Blocked. Stopped is resumable when the underlying run/checkpoint supports continuation; Cancelled is terminal unless a new/restarted run is explicitly created.
A stopped run MUST retain RequestID, conversation/message linkage, selected model/provider policy, context references/snapshot metadata, completed tool/action records, Action Graph, Subagent state/checkpoints and remaining budget/limits where applicable. Resume MUST NOT repeat already-completed consequential actions. If the provider cannot literally resume a token stream, Dulche may continue from persisted checkpoint/context while preserving the same user-visible continuation semantics.
Regenerate and Retry remain distinct from Resume: Regenerate creates a new response branch; Retry re-attempts a failed operation/run with idempotency and side-effect safeguards.
Model selection
Spaces MUST use the Universal Model Picker. Effective model policy resolves explicit request override, conversation override, Space default, app/default policy and global default in that order, subject to capability/privacy/entitlement restrictions.
Switching model mid-conversation MUST NOT rewrite provenance of prior responses. Every AI response/run must retain effective model/provider identity and relevant policy provenance.
Sources and context
Spaces context MUST be represented as explicit typed references rather than opaque prompt stuffing. Supported reference families include Files/folders, Boards/pages, Write/Present/Canvas/Data artifacts, Mail threads/messages, Planner items, Map routes, Stack projects, Sites/projects, connected-app entities, conversations and uploaded sources.
Each context/source reference MUST retain stable source identity, revision/change token where applicable, permission state and ingestion/index state where required. Spaces must be able to detect that a referenced source has changed rather than treating an old snapshot as current.
A Sources/Context surface MUST let the user inspect what is attached, where it came from, current revision/availability, whether it is included automatically, ingestion/index status and remove/disable controls. Spaces MUST NOT rely on mysterious hidden context for ordinary operation.
Dragging/adding a folder SHOULD create a folder reference plus scope/filter configuration rather than eagerly duplicating every contained file. Spaces can retrieve authorised current files on demand through Files APIs.
Context budgeting and retrieval
When available material exceeds the selected model’s context, Dulche/Spaces MUST use deterministic context selection/retrieval. Required/current selection and explicit attached sources take priority over optional historical context. Retrieval/summarisation/omission decisions MUST be represented in run logs/Action Graph sufficiently for inspection.
Spaces MUST NOT claim that an answer considered an entire source set when only a subset was retrieved. Source-grounded modes must retain provenance for the chunks/entities actually used.
Canonical artifact editing
Any authorised mutable 9to1 document/project/entity whose owning app exposes domain APIs MUST be openable/editable from Spaces without creating a duplicate canonical copy. Spaces MAY host an embedded artifact surface alongside conversation, but the artifact retains its owning app identity, revision history and permissions.
Spaces MUST support direct low-risk edits when clearly requested and reviewable proposed-change workflows for larger/ambiguous mutations. Review UI MUST correspond to actual typed target-app actions/diffs and MUST NOT present a fabricated text-only diff disconnected from the canonical artifact.
Shared Productivity Engine
Spaces MUST use Home’s Shared Productivity Engine for supported rich content/object rendering and editing. Pasted or embedded tables, code blocks, images, drawings, graphs and other shared objects MUST preserve shared schema/formatting and remain editable through the same object actions used by Write, Present, Canvas and Boards.
AI-generated shared-engine objects SHOULD be directly transferable to supporting apps without reconstructing them from rendered text/images.
Plugins, Skills and Agents
Every Space has its own capability bindings for Dulche Plugins, Skills and persistent Agents. By default, a newly created Space inherits all currently installed/enabled Dulche Plugins and Skills and all available Agents unless restricted by policy.
Space capability bindings MUST support inherited availability plus explicit per-Space enable/disable/exclusion and optional version pinning where the underlying package/Agent contract supports it. Installing a new globally enabled Plugin/Skill or making a new Agent available automatically makes it available to Spaces that still inherit that category.
Space bindings reference canonical Dulche package IDs/versions and Agent IDs; they MUST NOT clone package/Agent definitions into the Space. Availability does not grant permission: a Space may see a Plugin/Skill/Agent while still requiring the normal permission/trust decision before protected actions execute.
Shared node-editor framework
All Space graph editing uses the Home-owned Node Graph Framework also used by Automations. Home owns graph data structures, node registry, typed ports/connections, renderer, pan/zoom/selection, grouping, validation, clipboard/duplicate, undo/redo, graph versioning, execution visualisation hooks and contextual AI-bar integration. Spaces owns Space-specific event/action nodes and graph semantics; Dulche executes AI/model/Agent/tool portions; owning apps execute their typed actions.
Graph connections MUST be typed. Incompatible connections MUST be rejected or require an explicit conversion node. Graph nodes MUST reference stable canonical app/capability IDs rather than UI coordinates or screen controls.
Built-in Space Events & Extensions editor
Built-in Chat, Study, Tasks, Agent, Shopping, Research, Translate and Experiences Spaces expose a limited Events & Extensions graph editor attached only through published safe extension hooks. The protected first-party core graph/behaviour is not editable, disconnectable or replaceable.
Allowed extension hooks may include Space loaded/activated/deactivated/closed, conversation created/opened, response started/stopped/resumed/completed and relevant type-specific events such as Study session started/completed, Task started/blocked/completed, Research run completed, Translate Translation Set/job completed, Experience started/checkpointed/branched/completed or Agent run state changed.
Allowed extension actions may include Set Do Not Disturb, send Home notification, add/remove allowed context, open app/entity, create Planner item, invoke Automation/Agent/Skill/Plugin/permitted MCP capability, update extension-owned Space variables and add/show custom sidebar surfaces.
The built-in extension editor MUST NOT allow removal/replacement of protected sidebar items, suppression of required first-party events, replacement of the Space’s conversation/runtime behaviour, bypass of permissions, mutation of protected first-party graph internals, disabling required recovery/safety behaviour or creation of unbounded loops.
Published extension hooks are versioned. After a 9to1 update, incompatible/retired hooks MUST produce a needs-attention/repair state rather than silently breaking the whole Space.
User-created Space full graph editor
User-created Spaces created through + New Space may use the full Space graph editor. Their graph may define lifecycle behaviour, conversation routing, source retrieval, model/Agent selection, logic/branching, state, app actions, Generative UI, custom sidebar surfaces and other authorised Space behaviour.
Full graphs MAY use bounded logic nodes such as If, Switch, Filter, Merge, Wait, bounded Loop, variables, compare/transform plus typed AI/runtime nodes such as Prompt model, Choose model, Run Agent, invoke Skill/Plugin/MCP, retrieve/search sources and Generate UI.
Full graphs MUST still obey Home permissions, Dulche runtime limits, package/Agent availability, target-app contracts and loop/budget safeguards. A graph is not a permission escalation mechanism.
Custom graph edits MUST use Draft versus Active revision semantics. Changes are validated before Apply/Publish; invalid drafts do not replace the last valid active graph. Prior active revisions SHOULD be rollback-capable.
Graph-editor AI bar
Both the built-in Events & Extensions editor and the full user-created Space graph editor MUST host the persistent contextual AI bar. The bar receives graph-semantic context and modifies graphs only through typed Node Graph APIs, never by mouse/keyboard simulation.
A user MUST be able to request behaviour in natural language such as turning on Do Not Disturb when Study activates or adding a Planner sidebar surface. AI-generated graph changes MUST be presented as valid graph mutations and the assistant SHOULD explain the resulting behaviour in plain language, with relevant nodes highlightable from the explanation.
If a request would modify protected built-in behaviour, the editor/AI MUST reject that mutation and direct the user toward a user-created Space/full graph instead of attempting an unsafe override.
Custom sidebar surfaces
Space extension graphs MAY add custom sidebar items without replacing protected built-in items. Every custom SidebarItem MUST have stable SidebarItemID, title, icon, order/placement, visibility condition where supported, InterfaceType, interface reference/definition and required permissions.
Supported InterfaceType families MUST include AppSurface, CUI and GenerativeUI. AppSurface embeds an authorised surface from another 9to1 app such as Planner, Files, Boards, Maps, Stack or another declared embeddable surface while preserving canonical owning-app behaviour. CUI renders an explicitly authored safe interface backed by typed state/actions. GenerativeUI renders a Dulche-generated interface constrained by the Generative UI schema/component/action rules.
Generative sidebar interfaces MAY be Dynamic (regenerated/refreshed from current authorised context) or Persisted (stored definition until explicitly regenerated/edited). Generated UI MUST NOT execute arbitrary code or gain permissions merely because it is displayed.
Protected built-in sidebar IDs/namespaces cannot be shadowed/overwritten by extensions. Custom entries use extension-owned stable IDs.
Long-running work and Action Graph
Long-running requests/tasks MUST expose run status, current objective/step, elapsed state, Subagents/tool activity summaries, blockers, approvals and outputs where applicable, with Pause/Resume/Stop/Open Action Graph controls supported by the underlying run.
Closing/navigating away from Spaces MUST NOT automatically kill a run that was explicitly started with background-capable semantics. Home/Dulche retains durable run state and may notify through Home when work completes, blocks, needs approval or fails.
Tool/action rendering may be collapsed in conversation but MUST remain inspectable. Action Graph opens the actual Dulche execution graph; Spaces MUST NOT fabricate a second independent action history.
Agents and Subagents
Persistent Agents may be invoked inside any Space where available/authorised. The Space contributes authorised context but MUST NOT expand the Agent’s own effective permissions, tool scopes or memory policy.
Dulche Subagents remain runtime child-execution primitives and MUST NOT be conflated with persistent user-facing Agents. Spaces may show concise worker counts/status while detailed execution remains inspectable in Action Graph.
Memory and Dulche Den
Spaces MUST support explicit memory/context scopes including conversation-local, Space-level and permitted broader personal/team/organisation scopes. Space-level persistent memory/context lives through Dulche Den under stable Space identity and applicable permissions.
Shared Spaces MUST NOT implicitly expose a participant’s private personal Den context or private connected accounts. Caller-specific private context remains private unless deliberately shared through an authorised shared/team mechanism.
Web access and source provenance
Web access MUST be an explicit Space/tool policy with at least Allowed, Ask and Disabled semantics where applicable. Source-only/closed-corpus workflows MUST be able to disable outside web retrieval completely.
When an answer materially relies on identifiable source material, Spaces MUST preserve clickable provenance/citations back to the underlying file/page/message/web source/entity where supported. It MUST distinguish source-derived claims from generated reasoning and must not claim support that the retrieved sources do not provide.
Search, organisation and sharing
Spaces MUST support search across authorised Space/conversation titles, messages, source names and applicable run/tool metadata. Search respects Space sharing/permissions.
Conversations MUST support rename, pin, archive, delete/recover, move to another compatible Space, duplicate/fork and export. Moving a conversation changes future Space environment/policy but MUST preserve historical provenance/model/action records.
Spaces MAY be shared at Space or conversation level with explicit roles such as Viewer, Participant and Editor/Admin or equivalent typed scopes. Multi-human conversations MUST record AuthorPrincipalID per human message. Sharing a Space MUST NOT automatically share private external-account credentials or personal Den state.
Study structured state
Study MUST persist structured learning state such as course/topic/concept, attempts, recorded confidence/proficiency evidence, last reviewed, next review and source references. It MUST support source-only versus broader-information policy and clearly distinguish supplied-source content from outside knowledge when both are permitted.
Tasks structured state
Task MUST contain at least TaskID, Objective, Status, Plan, ordered Steps, CurrentStep, Dependencies, Inputs, Outputs, Blockers, Approvals and associated RunID(s). Required states include Draft, Ready, Running, Waiting, Blocked, Paused, Completed, Failed and Cancelled.
A Task may invoke persistent Agents, Dulche Subagents and tools, and may itself be launched by an Automation, but Task identity remains the user-level work item rather than becoming an Agent or Automation.
Spaces API
9to1.Spaces.List();
9to1.Spaces.Get(spaceID);
9to1.Spaces.Create(config);
9to1.Spaces.Update(spaceID, patch, expectedRevision?);
9to1.Spaces.Delete(spaceID);
9to1.Spaces.Restore(spaceID);
9to1.Spaces.Move(spaceID, parentSpaceID?, position?);
9to1.Spaces.ListConversations(spaceID);
9to1.Spaces.CreateConversation(spaceID, config?);
9to1.Spaces.GetConversation(conversationID);
9to1.Spaces.Send(conversationID, message);
9to1.Spaces.Stop(requestID);
9to1.Spaces.Resume(requestID);
9to1.Spaces.Retry(messageID, options?);
9to1.Spaces.Regenerate(messageID, options?);
9to1.Spaces.BranchFrom(messageID);
9to1.Spaces.SwitchBranch(conversationID, branchID);
9to1.Spaces.Context.List(conversationID);
9to1.Spaces.Context.Add(conversationID, reference);
9to1.Spaces.Context.Remove(conversationID, contextID);
9to1.Spaces.Capabilities.List(spaceID);
9to1.Spaces.Capabilities.SetOverride(spaceID, capabilityID, state);
9to1.Spaces.Artifact.Open(reference);
9to1.Spaces.Artifact.ApplyAction(reference, action);
9to1.Spaces.Tasks.Create(spaceID, config);
9to1.Spaces.Tasks.Run(taskID);
9to1.Spaces.Tasks.Pause(taskID);
9to1.Spaces.Tasks.Resume(taskID);
9to1.Spaces.Tasks.Cancel(taskID);
9to1.Spaces.Sidebar.List(spaceID);
9to1.Spaces.Sidebar.Add(spaceID, item);
9to1.Spaces.Sidebar.Update(spaceID, sidebarItemID, patch);
9to1.Spaces.Sidebar.Remove(spaceID, sidebarItemID);
9to1.Spaces.Extensions.GetGraph(spaceID);
9to1.Spaces.Extensions.UpdateDraft(spaceID, graph, expectedRevision?);
9to1.Spaces.Extensions.Validate(spaceID, revision?);
9to1.Spaces.Extensions.Activate(spaceID, revision);
9to1.Spaces.Share(spaceID, principalID, role);
These are minimum canonical entry points. Every user-visible Space operation, built-in extension action and full custom graph action MUST have equivalent typed APIs under the global API-parity rule.
Failure behaviour
Spaces MUST return structured failures including SpaceNotFound, ConversationNotFound, MessageNotFound, ContextUnavailable, ContextRevisionConflict, SourceIngestionFailed, PermissionDenied, ModelUnavailable, ModelCapabilityMismatch, ToolUnavailable, ToolFailed, ArtifactUnavailable, ArtifactRevisionConflict, RunBlocked, RunCancelled, RunFailed, WebAccessDisabled, MemoryScopeDenied, SharedContextUnavailable, ProtectedSpaceMutationDenied, InvalidGraphConnection, GraphValidationFailed and ExtensionHookIncompatible in addition to the global error contract.
Acceptance requirements
Spaces is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
Chat, Study, Tasks, Agent, Shopping, Research, Translate and Experiences remain distinct protected first-party Space types.
Translate Space shows selected language chips immediately above the normal chatbar, uses normal Space context, and renders each target-language result as its own labelled assistant speech bubble.
Experiences maintains canonical structured Experience state separately from generated narrative text, including hidden/private state where configured.
Experience branching/rewind preserves the matching conversation and Experience-state revision without pretending to undo real external side effects.
Persistent Agent characters receive only their authorised Experience view, while lightweight characters do not require permanent Den Agent creation.
Experiences can launch a formal Play Match and receive an explicit Play-to-Experiences handoff without implicitly merging MatchState and ExperienceState.
+ New Space creates a user-defined Space and Edit Spaces can reorder/nest/manage Spaces without exposing protected first-party internals.
The sidebar uses the selected-Space control, built-in destinations, New Chat, Space-relevant options, + New Space and Edit Spaces in the defined hierarchy.
Stopping a resumable response replaces Stop with Play/Resume and Resume continues the same run without redoing completed consequential actions.
Editing/regenerating earlier messages creates branches without destroying prior history/action records.
Every Space inherits globally installed/enabled Dulche Skills/Plugins and available Agents by default, while per-Space exclusions work and do not grant permissions.
Built-in Spaces expose only the protected Events & Extensions graph and cannot remove/replace required first-party behaviour/UI.
A built-in Study extension can turn on Do Not Disturb on activation and restore/perform a configured safe action on deactivation.
A built-in Space can add a custom sidebar item without shadowing/removing protected items.
Custom sidebar items can host an authorised app surface such as Planner, an authored CUI interface and a safe Generative UI interface.
User-created Spaces expose the full graph editor with Draft/Validate/Activate behaviour and rollback-capable prior active revision.
The graph-editor AI bar can create a valid extension graph through typed Node Graph actions and explain the resulting behaviour.
Invalid type connections, unavailable packages/Agents, missing permissions and unbounded cycles are detected before activation.
A Write artifact and Board/shared object can be opened/edited canonically from Spaces without duplicate copies.
Shared Productivity Engine objects round-trip between Spaces and supporting productivity apps without schema/format loss.
Explicit sources preserve identity/revision/provenance and large source sets use inspectable retrieval/context budgeting.
A web-disabled/source-only workflow cannot silently browse outside its allowed corpus.
Persistent Agent permissions are not expanded merely because the Agent is invoked from a Space.
Private personal Den context does not leak into a shared Space.
Long-running background-capable work survives navigation/closing the UI and reconnects to Home/Dulche state.
Action Graph opens the real Dulche execution graph and Subagents remain distinct from persistent Agents.
Study progress is based on recorded study interactions/answers rather than unsupported confidence inference.
Tasks remain distinct entities from Agents and Automations.
Home/Dulche restart preserves durable conversation/run state and does not corrupt Space history.
Spaces remains usable for ordinary conversation when advanced agentic/tool capabilities are unavailable.
Vision & Voice
Product role
Vision & Voice is the dedicated user-facing multimodal AI surface for live voice, text-with-voice, images, screenshots, camera input, screen-aware interaction and contextual ambient listening. The underlying realtime/audio model runtime lives in Dulche; Vision & Voice owns user-facing session controls, capture sources, privacy state, presentation and Overlay integration.
Vision & Voice MUST use the same canonical conversations, Spaces, model/provider state, Plugins, Skills, Agents, permissions, Action Graph and Dulche Den context as the rest of 9to1. Starting Voice MUST NOT create an isolated voice-only conversation database.
Session-first modern interface
The full Vision & Voice app MUST use a modern session-first CUI interface focused on the active interaction rather than a conventional text-chat layout. The centre of the UI shows session state and current multimodal activity, with compact Mic, Camera, Screen and more controls plus an explicit End session action.
Transcript, current visual sources, model/voice, Space/conversation, tools/actions, Action Graph and device/session details SHOULD be available through collapsible secondary surfaces so the primary experience remains uncluttered.
Starting and continuing sessions
A multimodal session may start from Vision & Voice, the global AI bar, Spaces, AI Overlay or another app's contextual AI controls. Callers MAY supply SpaceID, ConversationID, current artifact/entity references, selected objects and suggested mode. Supplied semantic context MUST be preferred over redundant visual capture.
If no conversation is supplied, Vision & Voice creates or selects an appropriate conversation under the applicable Space policy. Moving between full Vision & Voice, floating voice pill, Overlay and Spaces MUST preserve the same canonical session/conversation where the user is continuing the same interaction.
Multimodal session model
MultimodalSession MUST contain at least SessionID, ConversationID, SpaceID, VoiceMode, Voice runtime/session reference, effective model policy, selected VoiceModelID/VoiceID where applicable, microphone/camera/screen states, active visual sources, input/output devices, status, created timestamp and revision/state metadata. Live Translate sessions additionally bind a LiveTranslateLanguageSet containing one or more selected languages/locales, direction mode (one-way, bidirectional or multilingual), per-output caption/speech preferences and selected glossary/terminology references where present.
Required session states include Starting, Listening, UserSpeaking, Processing, AssistantSpeaking, Paused, Reconnecting, Stopped, Ended and Failed or equivalent explicit states. The UI MUST make microphone/capture/listening state unambiguous and MUST NOT rely on a purely decorative animation.
Voice modes
Voice MUST support four first-class modes: Conversational, Monologue, Live Listener and Live Translate. They share Dulche/session infrastructure but have distinct turn-taking, execution and retention behaviour.
Conversational mode
Conversational mode is optimised for low-latency back-and-forth dialogue, natural interruption, normal questions/follow-ups, mixed speech/text input, tools/actions and moderate assistant turns. The assistant expects turn exchange rather than uninterrupted long-form narration.
Monologue mode
Monologue mode is optimised for sustained AI speech such as podcasts, lectures, project briefings or long-form explanations. It MUST support substantially longer uninterrupted output, section/chapter planning, pause/resume, user interruption and continuation from the prior position without losing the planned structure.
Monologue MAY expose optional target duration and style controls such as briefing, podcast, lecture or explanation while still inferring these settings from the user's request when clear. A MonologueRun SHOULD retain Objective, optional TargetDuration, ordered Sections, CurrentSection, playback/progress state and SourceRefs so Resume has deterministic semantics.
Live Listener mode
Live Listener is a contextual ambient-listening mode for lessons, lectures, meetings, presentations, workshops and similar environments. It MUST continuously derive relevant semantic information and permitted actions without behaving as a default permanent recorder/transcriber.
Live Listener MUST be capable of extracting useful structured information such as current topic, important points, key dates, homework/tasks, decisions, questions, referenced resources and potential actions. It MAY react to contextual cues through typed actions, for example opening Canvas when a lesson moves to whiteboard work or creating a Planner item when homework/deadline information is clearly detected and authorised.
Live Listener MUST contextually distinguish likely primary relevant speech from background conversation, incidental noise, repeated information, action cues and uncertain material using available audio characteristics, continuity, current Space/topic and semantic relevance. It MUST represent uncertainty rather than treating every audible statement as authoritative/relevant.
Live Listener ephemeral audio and privacy
Live Listener MUST NOT persist a room conversation as a transcript or permanent audio recording by default. Ambient audio is processed through a short-lived ephemeral rolling buffer required for understanding; once no longer needed for semantic extraction/runtime continuity, raw audio is discarded.
Durable Live Listener output should be the useful derived result such as notes, tasks, dates, decisions, references or explicit user-approved retained snippets, not a verbatim transcript of everyone in the room.
Explicit recording/transcription is a separate opt-in retention mode with clear persistent UI indication and applicable legal/privacy warnings. Live Listener MUST NOT silently enable recording merely because retaining audio would improve later processing.
The Live Listener surface MUST clearly show Listening state, current Space/context, extraction categories/actions enabled, Recording audio state and Transcript retention state, with Pause and Stop controls. A compact activity feed MAY show semantic events/actions without reproducing ambient speech verbatim.
Live Listener notes and actions
Users MUST be able to choose where Live Listener writes durable notes/results, including temporary session notes or supported canonical destinations such as a Write document, Board page or Study Space notes. Updates MUST use the destination app's typed API and revision semantics.
Automatic Live Listener action policy MUST be configurable through normal Home permissions/trust. Low-risk actions such as adding notes, recording homework, opening relevant 9to1 apps or adding authorised Planner dates MAY run automatically where trusted; consequential external communication, submission, deletion, purchase or similarly high-risk actions retain their normal confirmation/trust requirements.
Live Listener integrates with Spaces. Starting it from a Study/Research/Agent/user-created Space supplies that Space's authorised sources, tools, Skills, Plugins, Agents, memory and model policy. Space graphs may subscribe to safe Live Listener events and invoke typed actions within their capability profile.
Live Translate mode
Live Translate is a first-class realtime interpretation mode backed jointly by Dulche Voice and Dulche Translate. Vision & Voice owns the live session UI/capture/output presentation; Dulche Voice owns realtime audio/session streaming; Dulche Translate owns language detection, translation, terminology/glossaries, translation context and multi-language variant generation.
Live Translate MUST support one-way, bidirectional and multilingual interpretation. A one-way session may translate one source language into one or more output languages. Bidirectional mode interprets between selected languages based on turn/language context. Multilingual mode may contain more than two active languages and MUST support multiple simultaneous target outputs when the active model/runtime can do so.
A Live Translate session MUST expose the selected language/locale set clearly and allow languages to be added or removed without ending the session where supported. Source language MAY be Auto Detect, but an explicit expected language set SHOULD be used to improve reliability in noisy multilingual environments.
Translated speech, translated captions and original-language captions MUST be independently controllable where supported. One source utterance MAY produce simultaneous caption/output streams in multiple target languages. Each connected/authorised output client MAY choose its preferred target language when platform/session architecture supports per-client outputs.
Live Translate SHOULD preserve short-lived conversational translation context so pronouns, corrections, terminology and follow-up statements remain coherent. It MUST represent uncertainty rather than inventing a confident translation when language/speaker/meaning is materially ambiguous.
Live Translate MUST handle natural corrections and partial speech without prematurely treating unstable hypotheses as final durable content. For example, a speaker correcting a date within the same turn should yield a coherent corrected translation rather than two contradictory final statements.
Live Translate MAY use Vision sources to translate signs, menus, presentation slides, shared screens and other visible text during the same session. When structured semantic text is available from a 9to1 app, that semantic text is preferred over OCR/pixels.
Live Translate supports normal Voice tools, Dulche Agents and authorised typed actions. A user may ask for an action based on translated context, such as saving translated notes, sending an approved translated message or applying translated content to an owning artifact. Agentic actions MUST use the normal owning-app APIs, permissions, approvals, idempotency and Action Graph; translation does not grant broader authority.
Live Translate MAY use selected Dulche Translate glossaries/protected-term rules so product names, legal terms, code identifiers or domain terminology remain consistent across speech and captions.
Live Translate raw audio and ordinary conversation transcript MUST be ephemeral by default. The runtime may retain a short-lived rolling audio/translation-context buffer required for realtime interpretation and then discard it. Saving a transcript or audio recording is a separate explicit opt-in with visible state and applicable privacy/legal warnings.
Live Translate is distinct from Live Listener: Live Translate's primary purpose is realtime cross-language interpretation, whereas Live Listener's primary purpose is ambient understanding, derived notes and contextual actions. Either may use normal Agents/tools, but one mode MUST NOT silently change into the other.
Text input during Voice
Every active Voice session MUST support typed text input without ending the session. Spoken and typed user messages share the same ConversationID and session context. Text input is required for precise names, URLs/code, private instructions, corrections, attachments and situations where the user wants speech output without speaking aloud.
Voice MUST support modality combinations including Voice in + Voice out, Voice in + Text out, Text in + Voice out and Voice with captions where the active model/configuration supports them.
Interruption, stop and resume
Users MUST be able to interrupt assistant speech naturally. Dulche should stop/duck current speech output and process the new input without requiring a manual Stop first, subject to runtime capability.
Explicit Pause, Resume, Mute and End controls remain available. If a generated response/run is manually stopped but resumable, Vision & Voice uses the same Stop → Play/Resume semantics as Spaces and MUST NOT repeat already-completed consequential actions.
Floating voice pill
When the full Vision & Voice app is not foregrounded, an active session MAY collapse to a lightweight floating voice pill. The pill MUST expose true listening/speaking/status indication, mute/unmute, pause/resume where applicable, return to full Vision & Voice and End session.
Opening the pill/full app returns to the same SessionID and MUST NOT silently start a second Voice session.
Transcript and captions
Conversational/Monologue sessions MAY expose a live transcript as an optional/collapsible conversation view distinguishing user, assistant and tool/action events. Partial speech-recognition hypotheses may update live, but only stable/final user content should enter durable conversation history unless a revision model explicitly supports corrections.
Live Listener and Live Translate do not use ordinary transcript retention by default as defined above. Live captions may be enabled independently of durable transcript retention. In Live Translate, original-language and translated captions are independently controllable where supported; caption display alone MUST NOT imply that a permanent transcript is being saved.
Audio devices and processing
Vision & Voice MUST support input microphone selection, output device selection, default/automatic device, hot-switching during a session, permission/unavailable/disconnected states and appropriate input/output level feedback. Device loss MUST degrade/recover gracefully rather than corrupt the conversation.
Noise suppression, echo cancellation, automatic gain and voice-activity detection MAY be provided when supported by the platform/runtime, with sensible defaults and inspectable advanced settings.
Universal Model Picker integration and named voices
Vision & Voice uses Home's Universal Model Picker. The selected Voice Model/configuration MUST be capability-checked for the requested mode and modalities, including realtime audio, Monologue, Live Listener, Live Translate, vision, tools/actions, required language/translation support and interruption where relevant.
If the selected Voice Model exposes multiple named voices, the user-facing picker field is Voice and shows the available voices, with the underlying Voice Model shown as secondary metadata. Internally VoiceModelID and VoiceID remain separate. If no separate voices are exposed, the field is Voice Model.
Discover/Home SHOULD recommend the highest-quality compatible Voice Model/configuration for the requested mode/constraints when the user has not explicitly overridden it. Switching named Voice MUST NOT be misrepresented as changing the underlying model.
Vision sources
Supported explicit visual-source families include UploadedImage, Screenshot, ScreenRegion, WindowShare, DisplayShare, Camera and AppProvidedVisualContext. Every active source MUST have session-local stable identity, provenance/source type and visible active/paused state.
The UI MUST make clear what AI can currently see. Continuous sharing is distinct from a single screenshot and must expose source, pause, change source and stop-sharing controls.
Screenshots, screen sharing and camera
Screenshot capture SHOULD support full display, selected window and selected region, with easy region capture from Overlay. Captures MAY be cropped/annotated before submission where supported.
Continuous screen sharing MUST show an unmistakable persistent capture indicator and source identity. Pausing/stopping sharing MUST stop new visual frames from reaching the runtime.
Camera mode MUST support available camera selection, snapshot, supported continuous camera context, pause and camera switching. Microphone/camera/screen capture MUST never activate solely because the model decides additional context would help.
Adaptive visual sampling
For continuous camera/screen input, Dulche MAY use adaptive frame sampling/change detection and model/provider limits to reduce redundant processing. Sampling is an optimisation only; stale visual state MUST NOT be represented as current.
Semantic context before pixels
When a 9to1 app exposes semantic context such as ArtifactID, selection/object IDs, structured document context and available typed actions, Vision & Voice MUST prefer that structured context over screenshot/OCR/screen scraping. Vision supplements semantic APIs rather than replacing them.
Deliberately attached images/screenshots may persist as conversation sources. Continuous camera/screen frames MUST remain ephemeral by default and MUST NOT all become permanent attachments.
Privacy and local/cloud boundaries
Vision & Voice MUST visibly indicate active microphone, camera and screen/window sharing plus relevant cloud-model use when required by privacy policy. Pausing/stopping a source must actually stop new data delivery.
Local-only/private model policy MUST NOT silently fall back to a cloud model for audio, camera or screen processing. Any local-to-cloud fallback follows the Universal Model Picker's explicit fallback/privacy rules.
AI Overlay
AI Overlay is a global lightweight contextual entry point owned by Vision & Voice and invoked through a configured keyboard shortcut, floating button and/or supported contextual selection action. It is not a normal page opened inside the Vision & Voice app.
Overlay combines authorised semantic context from the foreground 9to1 app, selected text/objects, explicit screenshot/window/region capture and manually attached files/images. For non-9to1 apps or unavailable semantic APIs, explicit Vision capture may provide visual context.
Overlay MUST be fast, compact and capable of rendering CUI/Generative UI result/action cards. Overlay actions MUST invoke typed 9to1 APIs/Automations rather than arbitrary mouse/keyboard automation.
Overlay automation execution
Overlay MUST be able to discover and execute existing Automations relevant to the current typed selection/context. For example, selecting text and invoking an Automation named Send to my Boss supplies the selected text plus source metadata through the Automation's declared input schema.
Overlay passes typed inputs such as selected Text/File/Artifact references, AppID, ArtifactID/ObjectID and additional authorised context. Missing required Automation inputs MUST be requested from the user rather than guessed when unsafe.
Automation execution from Overlay uses the canonical Automation definition, permissions, approvals, Action Graph, logging, idempotency and error handling. Overlay MUST NOT independently emulate the Automation's actions or use it to bypass consequential-action confirmation.
Overlay continuity
Overlay MUST support Continue in Spaces, preserving the same conversation/request context and retained explicit sources. Closing the transient Overlay closes only the overlay UI; ephemeral captures are discarded according to retention policy unless deliberately retained.
If a Voice session is already active, invoking Overlay MAY augment the same session, for example allowing the user to select a screen region while saying 'look at this bit' without spawning a second assistant.
Voice tools and consequential actions
Spoken or typed Voice requests may execute normal authorised 9to1 app/tool actions. Voice does not reduce permission requirements. High-risk confirmation prompts MUST identify the concrete target/action rather than relying on ambiguous verbal confirmation.
AI-assisted dictation
Dictation is a separate reusable speech-to-text editing capability, not a full Voice conversation mode. It MUST be available to supported editable text surfaces such as Write, Spaces, Mail, Boards, Present speaker notes, Planner descriptions, Sites, AI Studio and other CUI text editors through the shared platform capability.
During Dictation the AI does not respond conversationally or speak back. It converts speech into editable text/actions in the host app. Dictation SHOULD support Raw, Clean and Polished modes or equivalent: Raw remains close to literal transcription; Clean removes filler/repetition/false starts and adds punctuation; Polished may lightly restructure rambling speech into well-written prose while preserving intended meaning.
Dictation MUST support contextual correction/commands such as new paragraph, bullet list, heading changes, delete/replace recent text and spoken self-corrections, applied through the host app/shared productivity engine rather than being inserted literally when recognised as commands.
Dictation MAY use limited authorised current-editor context to improve terminology, names and punctuation. It MUST NOT use unrelated private context merely to improve transcription.
Background/session continuity
An explicitly active Voice session may continue when the Vision & Voice window loses focus according to platform permission/background rules. Camera/screen sharing continues only while its visible capture state remains active; OS/session lock must suspend/stop sensitive capture according to platform policy.
If Home/Dulche temporarily restarts, Vision & Voice MUST preserve durable conversation/session metadata, show truthful Reconnecting/failed state and reconnect where supported. It MUST NOT indicate that microphone/model processing is active while disconnected.
Accessibility
Vision & Voice MUST support captions, keyboard-only controls, screen-reader-labelled session/capture states, visual equivalents for audio state, adjustable caption/text sizing where applicable, reduced motion and non-colour-only state indication. No required action may be voice-only.
Platform capability behaviour
Native Windows/9to1-OS may provide the full OS-global Overlay, native window/display capture and background voice capabilities. Web may provide microphone, camera and browser-authorised screen sharing but MUST NOT claim an OS-global Overlay outside the browser. Mobile uses supported camera/microphone/share-sheet/screen-capture capabilities. All surfaces capability-negotiate rather than assuming parity.
Vision & Voice API
9to1.VisionVoice.Start(config);
9to1.VisionVoice.GetSession(sessionID);
9to1.VisionVoice.End(sessionID);
9to1.VisionVoice.SetMode(sessionID, mode);
9to1.VisionVoice.SendText(sessionID, text);
9to1.VisionVoice.SetMicrophone(sessionID, enabled);
9to1.VisionVoice.SetCamera(sessionID, source?);
9to1.VisionVoice.SetScreenShare(sessionID, source?);
9to1.VisionVoice.CaptureScreenshot(config);
9to1.VisionVoice.AddVisualSource(sessionID, source);
9to1.VisionVoice.RemoveVisualSource(sessionID, sourceID);
9to1.VisionVoice.SetTranscriptVisible(sessionID, visible);
9to1.VisionVoice.SetCaptions(sessionID, enabled);
9to1.VisionVoice.SetLiveTranslateLanguages(sessionID, languages);
9to1.VisionVoice.SetLiveTranslateDirection(sessionID, direction);
9to1.VisionVoice.SetLiveTranslateOutput(sessionID, config);
9to1.VisionVoice.SetLiveTranslateGlossaries(sessionID, glossaryIDs);
9to1.VisionVoice.Overlay.Open(context?);
9to1.VisionVoice.Overlay.Close();
9to1.VisionVoice.Overlay.CaptureRegion();
9to1.VisionVoice.Overlay.RunAutomation(automationID, context);
9to1.VisionVoice.ContinueInSpaces(sessionID);
9to1.Dictation.Start(context, mode);
9to1.Dictation.Stop(sessionID);
9to1.Dictation.GetState(sessionID);
9to1.Dictation.SetMode(sessionID, mode);
Dulche remains execution authority for realtime audio/model streaming and exposes the corresponding Voice runtime APIs. Vision & Voice APIs own user-facing session/capture/presentation state and MUST NOT duplicate the Dulche runtime as a second incompatible engine.
Failure behaviour
Vision & Voice MUST return structured failures including MicrophonePermissionDenied, CameraPermissionDenied, ScreenCapturePermissionDenied, InputDeviceUnavailable, OutputDeviceUnavailable, CameraUnavailable, CaptureSourceUnavailable, VoiceModelUnavailable, VisionCapabilityUnavailable, ModelCapabilityMismatch, SessionDisconnected, SessionNotFound, VisualSourceUnavailable, CaptureStopped, ProviderUnavailable, PrivacyPolicyDenied, AutomationInputMissing, DictationUnavailable, LiveTranslateLanguageUnsupported, LiveTranslateLanguageAmbiguous, LiveTranslateCapabilityUnavailable and LiveTranslateOutputUnavailable in addition to normal Dulche/Translate/tool/action errors.
Acceptance requirements
Vision & Voice is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
Conversational, Monologue, Live Listener and Live Translate operate as distinct modes on shared canonical session/conversation infrastructure.
Typed text can be submitted during an active Voice session without ending it.
Conversational Voice supports natural interruption plus explicit pause/mute/end state.
Monologue preserves outline/progress and can resume after interruption/stopping without restarting completed content/actions.
Live Listener extracts structured lesson/meeting information while raw ambient audio/transcript is not persisted by default.
Explicit recording/transcription opt-in is visibly distinct from default Live Listener.
Live Listener can create authorised notes/homework/date actions and trigger a low-risk contextual app action such as opening Canvas.
Live Translate supports one-way, bidirectional and more-than-two-language sessions, including simultaneous target captions/output where supported.
Live Translate uses Dulche Translate for language/glossary/context handling and does not create a second translation engine.
Live Translate raw audio and ordinary transcript are ephemeral by default unless the user explicitly enables retention.
Live Translate can use normal Agents/tools and perform authorised translated-context actions only through owning typed APIs and normal approval rules.
Background/irrelevant speech is not indiscriminately written into notes and uncertain action cues do not silently cause consequential actions.
Floating voice pill controls the same SessionID as the full app.
Microphone/output device can hot-switch and device loss produces a recoverable truthful state.
Voice named-voice selection stores VoiceID separately from VoiceModelID and the UI label becomes Voice when multiple voices exist.
Discover/Universal Model Picker can recommend/select a compatible high-quality Voice Model without burying Voice under Audio.
Voice + screenshot, Voice + continuous screen share and camera input work with visible capture state.
Stopping camera/screen sharing immediately stops delivery of new frames.
Semantic app context is preferred over screen scraping when available.
Local-only/privacy policy cannot silently route audio/visual input to cloud.
Overlay can capture selected context and use typed APIs rather than arbitrary input simulation.
Overlay can execute an existing Automation using typed selected-text/context input and preserves the Automation's permission/Action Graph contract.
Continue in Spaces preserves the active conversation/context.
A high-risk spoken action still requires the correct explicit target-aware confirmation.
Dictation works in at least Write, Spaces and Mail as non-conversational speech-to-text with Raw/Clean/Polished behaviour.
Dictation removes filler/false starts in Clean/Polished modes without changing intended meaning and applies supported editing commands through host APIs.
Home/Dulche restart produces a truthful reconnect/failed state without losing durable conversation state.
Continuous capture frames remain ephemeral rather than being permanently attached by default.
Web/native capability differences are reported accurately, including no false claim of OS-global Overlay on web.
Mic/camera/screen/listening states and all required controls are accessible and not communicated by colour alone.
AI Studio
Product role
9to1 AI Studio is the advanced authoring, testing, debugging and packaging environment for reusable Dulche systems. It is not a second AI runtime. Dulche owns model/Agent/tool execution; Home owns permissions and the shared Node Graph Framework; Den owns persistent Agent state; AI Studio owns the structured authoring and developer experience over those canonical systems.
AI Studio MUST support both project-backed artifacts and direct editing of canonical Dulche entities. Harnesses and Tool packages are AI Studio projects; Agents are canonical Den-backed Dulche Agents edited directly through Agent Builder rather than duplicated as an AI Studio-only project type.
Navigation and landing page
AI Studio MUST use a clean persistent sidebar organised into Home, Projects, Build, Test & Debug, Resources and Templates. Build MUST expose Harnesses, Agents and Tools. Test & Debug MUST expose Playground, Evaluations, Test Suites and Replay. Resources MUST expose Schemas, Model Routers, Generative UI and Run Profiles.
The landing page MUST provide prominent New Harness, New Agent and New Tool actions plus Recent, Favourites/Pinned, Templates, search and Open/Import where applicable. New Agent opens Agent Builder and creates a canonical Dulche Agent directly in Den. New Harness and New Tool create AI Studio projects.
Projects lists AI Studio project-backed entities such as Harnesses and Tools. Agents appears as a first-class Build destination but resolves to the canonical Dulche Agent registry rather than a duplicate AI Studio project store.
Search, Recent, Favourites and Templates MUST use real persisted metadata/entities and MUST NOT be static mock content.
Project model
Every AI Studio project MUST have stable ProjectID, ProjectType, Name, Version, CreatedAt, ModifiedAt, owner/scope, project files/resources, dependency references, permission metadata and revision history. In the current release scope ProjectType MUST distinguish at least Harness and Tool. Display names are not identities and MAY be duplicated.
AI Studio projects persist independently from the currently running Dulche endpoint. Definitions reference models, Agents, Plugins, Skills, MCP capabilities, schemas, files/context and other dependencies by stable identity/version policy where available. Opening a project MUST NOT automatically execute model/tool work.
Project-backed artifacts MUST support create, open, save, duplicate, rename, history/versioning, validate, test, export/import where applicable, delete/recover and dependency inspection through typed APIs. Build/install/deploy/activate actions remain explicit operations distinct from editing.
Build — Harness Builder
Harness Builder creates runnable, inspectable Dulche-powered AI systems. A new Harness MUST start from a functional selected template or validated baseline rather than an empty non-working shell.
A Harness definition MUST be able to configure model/provider policies, prompts/instructions, context/session handling, tools, persistent Dulche Agents, Dulche Subagents/parallelisation, Skills, Plugins, MCP capabilities, permissions, budgets/limits, checkpoints/recovery, logging/Action Graph, structured outputs, Generative UI and supported APIs/entry points.
Harness Builder MUST distinguish persistent Den-backed Dulche Agents from transient Dulche Subagents. Harnesses MAY invoke both where allowed, but they are separate identity, memory and lifecycle concepts.
Generated/configured Harness source and configuration MUST remain inspectable/editable. Harness Builder MUST NOT lock the user into an opaque private runtime that cannot be reproduced, validated or debugged.
Harness projects MUST support Preview/Test using the same Dulche runtime contracts used by normal execution. Test UI MUST expose the effective model/provider, tools, Agents/Subagents, permissions, selected context, usage/timing, Action Graph, structured errors and outputs.
Harness advanced graph
Harness Builder MAY use the Home-owned Node Graph Framework for advanced orchestration. Supported graph logic may include request/event entry points, routing/classification, conditionals, model selection, Agent invocation, Subagent fan-out/merge, tools, retries, approvals, state and typed outputs.
Basic Harness creation MUST remain possible without graph editing. The graph is an advanced representation over canonical typed Harness behaviour rather than a requirement for every user.
Build — Agent Builder
Agent Builder is AI Studio’s direct structured editor for persistent Dulche Agents. It creates and edits the canonical Dulche Agent entity stored in Den; it MUST NOT create a separate incompatible AI Studio-only Agent project or use AI Studio as the Agent runtime host. Closing AI Studio does not stop or delete the Agent.
Agent Builder MUST follow a Workspace-Agents-style structured editing workflow rather than a GPT-style conversational creation wizard. The actual Agent configuration is visible and editable directly from the beginning; AI assistance may modify that configuration through typed Agent/graph APIs but MUST NOT hide the resulting state behind an opaque builder conversation.
The primary editor header MUST provide updated/save state plus Automations, Preview, Share and overflow actions. The Agent’s icon/avatar and name are presented prominently beneath the header.
The default-visible configuration sections MUST be Plugins / Connectors, Skills and Knowledge / Files, followed by a collapsed More Options disclosure and then the directly editable Instructions document.
Plugins / Connectors
Plugins / Connectors lists canonical Dulche Plugins, MCP/external connectors and applicable 9to1 app capability bindings available to the Agent. + Add opens the relevant Dulche capability browser. Entries are stable references; Agent Builder MUST NOT clone Plugin/connector definitions into the Agent.
Skills
Skills lists canonical installed Dulche Skills available to the Agent. + Add selects Skills by stable PackageID/version policy. Missing, incompatible, disabled or unauthorised Skills MUST be visibly diagnosed before activation.
Knowledge / Files
Knowledge / Files contains the Agent’s Den-backed Memory entry plus linked knowledge sources such as Files, folders, Drive documents, 9to1 artifacts and other authorised sources. Sources remain canonical references where possible rather than arbitrary duplicated attachments. Knowledge scope, provenance and permissions must remain inspectable.
More Options
More Options MUST be collapsed by default and contain Availability, Default Model and Quick Actions. The UI MAY remember the user’s local expanded/collapsed preference without changing Agent semantics.
Availability shows a simple primary state such as Global plus a Restrict Access action. Global means Dulche exposes the Agent on every compatible 9to1 surface. Restrict Access opens detailed scope controls for surfaces, Spaces, projects/entities, users/teams or other supported scopes. Availability is separate from permission.
Default Model uses the Universal Model Picker and supports Inherit or an explicit model/model-policy override plus supported reasoning/effort controls. Agent Builder MUST validate capability mismatches before activation.
Quick Actions are named manual Agent entry points with stable QuickActionID, label, optional icon/description, predefined instruction or named graph entry, optional typed InputSchema, context requirements, confirmation policy and order. They cascade wherever the Agent is available, subject to context visibility, and are distinct from Automations.
Instructions and assistant
Instructions are directly editable on the main Agent Builder page as a substantial document. Users can write Role, Responsibilities, boundaries and procedures directly rather than editing an opaque generated prompt.
Agent Builder SHOULD expose a contextual assistant rail with actions such as Test this agent, Add advanced logic and Improve this agent plus an Ask anything input. AI modifications use typed definition/graph APIs and the resulting concrete configuration MUST remain visible.
Agent advanced logic, preview and revisions
Add advanced logic opens the Home Node Graph Framework with the Agent capability profile. Advanced logic MAY define lifecycle hooks, routing, conditional behaviour, Agent-to-Agent delegation, Skill/Plugin/tool invocation, state, retries, approval gates and other authorised behaviour.
Preview runs the current draft definition as an explicitly test-scoped Dulche AgentRun using normal runtime semantics. It MUST NOT silently permit production side effects simply because the Agent is being previewed.
Automations opens/creates canonical Automations associated with the Agent. Scheduling or event-triggering an Agent MUST create a real Automation rather than an Agent-private timer.
Agent definitions MUST have stable AgentID and DefinitionRevision. Draft revisions are validated before activation. Existing AgentRuns retain the definition/model/capability provenance with which they began. Prior valid revisions SHOULD be rollback-capable.
Visual animated-avatar builder
AI Studio MUST provide a visual animated-avatar builder within the existing Agent Builder workflow. It MUST support visually editing the avatar, its animation states, transitions and event-to-animation mappings; previewing activity and conversational reactions; saving and reopening the configuration; and assigning the result to an Agent. Authoring MUST update the canonical Den-backed Dulche Agent and referenced assets rather than creating an incompatible AI Studio-only Agent or runtime.
The builder MUST expose the canonical Dulche Agent presentation fields and referenced assets, including static fallback, activity states, transitions and conversational reaction mappings. Preview MUST simulate presentation events without executing the corresponding real-world task or widening permissions. Equivalent authorised AI Studio/Agent APIs MUST support the visible editing, preview, save, reopen and assign operations with revision-conflict and asset-validation errors. Acceptance MUST cover a saved/reopened coding animation, a joke/laugh reaction and reduced-motion/static fallback on the same Den-backed Agent.
Build — Tool Builder
Tool Builder is the AI Studio builder for reusable Dulche capabilities. Supported first-class output types MUST include Skill, Plugin and MCP. Additional package kinds MAY be added without weakening stable identity, manifest, schema, dependency, permission, validation and version requirements.
Creating a Tool MUST begin with an explicit type-specific template rather than forcing Skill, Plugin and MCP concepts into one generic editor.
Skill Builder
Skill projects MUST support name/icon/description, directly editable instructions/workflows, examples, resources/files, required Plugins/MCP dependencies, supported contexts, declared permissions, version and a real Test Skill action against Dulche.
Skills are primarily declarative and MUST NOT gain arbitrary executable code solely because they are Skills. Executable behaviour must use declared authorised tool/Plugin/MCP dependencies.
Plugin Builder
Plugin projects MUST support versioned manifest editing, actions/tools, typed input/output schemas, permission/risk declarations, external account connections, optional CUI surfaces, dependencies, secure secret references, tests and package/install workflows.
Plugin UI surfaces MUST use approved CUI contracts. Plugin Builder SHOULD provide preview/testing of those surfaces without granting their actions permissions automatically.
MCP Builder
MCP projects MUST support client/server role, transport/process/endpoint definition, capability schemas, tools/resources/prompts where supported, authentication references, permissions, compatibility/versioning, test client/server operation and logs.
MCP Builder MUST support both consuming an MCP server and intentionally exposing approved 9to1 capabilities through server mode without bypassing their original permission model.
Shared builder assistant
Harness Builder, Agent Builder and Tool Builder SHOULD use a consistent contextual builder-assistant pattern. The assistant can test, improve, add advanced logic and perform typed edits against the currently open canonical definition/project.
Natural-language requests such as 'add a GitHub tool and require approval for merge actions' MUST resolve to actual manifest/graph/permission changes that remain directly inspectable rather than only producing explanatory prose.
Test & Debug — Playground
Playground is a developer scratch environment for experimenting with Dulche models, Agents, Skills, Plugins, tools/MCPs, instructions, context and Run Profiles without first creating a project or production Agent.
A Playground run MUST show result content, Generated UI where present, effective model/provider, effective instructions/context, tool/Agent activity, permissions, usage/timing, errors and Action Graph. It SHOULD support Save as Evaluation Case, Save as Test, Open in Agent Builder and Create Harness from this where applicable.
Playground is not a replacement for Spaces: it deliberately exposes technical execution/configuration detail rather than presenting the consumer conversational experience.
Test & Debug — Evaluations
Evaluations measure AI-system quality and behaviour across repeatable cases. Evaluation targets MAY include Dulche Agents/revisions, Harnesses, Skills, Plugins/tools, model/model-router policies and other supported reusable definitions.
Every EvaluationSuite MUST have stable EvalSuiteID, name, target/configuration, Cases, Graders, selected RunProfile/environment, optional baseline and revision metadata.
An EvaluationCase MAY define input, context, expected properties, expected output schema, required actions, forbidden actions, cost/latency limits and scoring/rubric criteria. Cases MUST preserve input/source provenance and target revision.
Supported grader families SHOULD include deterministic exact/schema checks, tool/action assertions, state assertions, rubric/LLM grading, human review and authorised custom Tool/Plugin graders. Results MUST distinguish deterministic facts from model-graded judgements.
Evaluation runs SHOULD support multiple repetitions/seeds where stochastic variation matters and MUST allow comparison against a baseline without pretending one run proves overall quality.
Test & Debug — Test Suites
Test Suites verify deterministic contracts rather than subjective quality. Tests MAY assert expected node/path, expected or forbidden tool/action calls, permission requests, schemas, output types, state transitions, retry behaviour and structured errors.
Tests MUST be runnable manually and through typed/CI-capable APIs. Agent activation, Tool install or Harness deployment MAY require configured mandatory suites to pass.
A failed test MUST preserve the exact target revision, Run Profile, effective dependencies and Action Graph needed to reproduce the failure.
Test & Debug — Replay & Debugger
Replay opens a real previous Dulche request or Agent/Harness/Playground/Automation-triggered AI run and presents its canonical Action Graph/timeline for debugging.
Users MUST be able to branch/replay from a valid node with controlled changes such as different model, Agent revision, instructions, context, tool result, capability availability, permission simulation or Run Profile. The original run/history remains immutable.
Replay MUST use Dulche restart/fork semantics and preserve side-effect safety. Replaying from before a consequential action MUST NOT blindly repeat an externally completed action without idempotency/explicit user-authorised behaviour.
Resources — Schema Builder
Schema Builder creates reusable versioned typed contracts used across AI Studio and Dulche, including Agent/Quick Action inputs, Agent outputs, Plugin actions, MCP capabilities, Automation data, structured model output, Generative UI actions and Harness entry points.
Every reusable schema MUST have stable SchemaID, version/compatibility metadata, field/type/constraint definitions and reverse dependency visibility. The editor SHOULD support both structured visual editing and raw schema/source editing for technical users.
Changing a shared schema MUST show affected dependants and compatibility impact before activation rather than silently breaking consuming Agents/Tools/Harnesses.
Resources — Model Router Builder
Model Router Builder creates reusable Universal Model Picker-compatible routing policies rather than a competing model system. Rules MAY route by modality, task classification, context size, required tools/capabilities, latency, cost budget, privacy/local-only constraints, Agent, surface or other typed request metadata.
Router policies MUST have deterministic precedence and explicit fallback rules. Local/private-to-cloud transitions require the same explicit privacy policy as the Universal Model Picker. The builder SHOULD visualise routes using the shared Node Graph Framework where useful while retaining a simpler rules view.
Resources — Generative UI Builder
Generative UI Builder authors and tests reusable CUI schemas/components/generation envelopes used by Dulche Generative UI, Plugins, Agents, Harnesses and Space sidebar interfaces.
It MUST support component hierarchy, typed state/bindings, approved typed actions, responsive behaviour, accessibility metadata, theming, fallback representation and preview. AI-generative definitions MUST explicitly constrain which components/actions can be generated and MUST NOT permit arbitrary trusted executable code.
Preview SHOULD cover supported desktop/narrow/mobile widths, light/dark themes, reduced motion, keyboard operation and accessibility semantics.
Resources — Run Profiles
Run Profiles are reusable execution-environment overlays such as Development, Test, Local Only, Production, Cheap or Maximum Quality. They let users change execution policy without mutating the underlying Agent/Harness/Tool definition.
A RunProfile MAY define model/fallback policy, budgets, timeouts, logging level, mock/sandbox connectors, permission simulation, concurrency/Subagent limits and network/privacy policy. Profile identity and revision MUST be recorded in runs/evaluations/tests for reproducibility.
Context Inspector
Context Inspector is a contextual AI Studio debugging tool showing what the model actually received or would receive for a request/run. It MUST distinguish Agent/Harness instructions, active Skills, Space/context instructions, selected artifacts, retrieved chunks, memory items, tool schemas, summarised context and omitted material.
For each context item, Context Inspector SHOULD show source identity/revision, provenance, full/summarised/retrieved status, token/size estimate where available, retrieval metadata and why it was selected or omitted. It MUST NOT imply that omitted sources were considered by the model.
Permission Simulator
Permission Simulator evaluates effective capabilities for a selected Agent/Harness/request context without executing the consequential action. It MUST show Allowed, Ask or Denied outcomes plus the contributing Agent, surface, Space, project/entity, caller/organisation and Home trust/policy decisions.
The simulator MUST explain the controlling reason for a denial/approval requirement and MUST use the same permission-resolution contracts as real execution. It is a diagnostic surface, not a way to grant permissions.
Dependency Inspector
Dependency Inspector visualises the canonical dependency graph of Agents, Harnesses, Tools, models, Skills, Plugins, MCP capabilities, schemas, knowledge sources, Automations, other Agents and related resources.
It MUST highlight missing dependencies, updates, disabled packages, revoked permission/access, version/schema incompatibility, inaccessible source and dependency cycles. Clicking a dependency SHOULD open/inspect the canonical entity where permitted.
Comparison view
Compare is a reusable contextual view for compatible entities/runs, including Agent revision vs revision, model vs model, Harness run vs run, Eval run vs baseline, Run Profile vs Run Profile and instruction/configuration revisions.
Comparison MAY show side-by-side outputs plus evaluation scores, deterministic test results, tool/action differences, Action Graph differences, latency, tokens/cost, errors, retries, selected context and effective model/provider. Model-quality comparisons SHOULD support multiple repetitions where needed rather than overgeneralising from one stochastic run.
Documentation Generator
Documentation Generator creates human-readable documentation from canonical definitions rather than requiring a separately maintained copy. It MUST be able to derive relevant identity/version, purpose, availability, dependencies, permissions, actions/APIs, schemas, examples, errors and compatibility information.
Supported outputs MAY include Markdown, HTML, Write documents, developer-site documentation or other typed export targets. Regeneration/update MUST reflect the canonical definition and MUST NOT silently overwrite hand-authored material without an explicit merge/replacement workflow.
Templates
Templates MUST be real inspectable versioned starter definitions/projects. Supported template families SHOULD include Harness, Agent, Skill, Plugin, MCP, Evaluation, Test Suite, Schema, Model Router, Generative UI and Run Profile where appropriate.
Instantiating an Agent template creates a new canonical Den-backed Dulche Agent. Instantiating project/resource templates creates new entities with their own stable IDs; template identity/version remains provenance rather than shared mutable state.
Validation, install and deployment boundaries
AI Studio MUST clearly distinguish authoring, validation, test/preview, build/package, install, activate and deploy/run concepts. Building a valid Plugin/Skill/MCP package does not automatically enable it, grant permissions, connect accounts or establish trust. Activating an Agent does not bypass runtime permissions. Deploying/running a Harness does not make its draft edits production state.
All validation MUST use the same canonical Dulche/Home schema, dependency, model-capability, permission and runtime contracts used after activation/install. A preview that succeeds only because it bypassed real contracts is non-conformant.
AI Studio API
9to1.AIStudio.ListProjects();
9to1.AIStudio.CreateProject(type, templateID?);
9to1.AIStudio.OpenProject(projectID);
9to1.AIStudio.ValidateProject(projectID);
9to1.AIStudio.TestProject(projectID, testConfig?);
9to1.AIStudio.ExportProject(projectID, destination);
9to1.AIStudio.Harness.CreateFromTemplate(templateID, config);
9to1.AIStudio.AgentBuilder.Create(definition);
9to1.AIStudio.AgentBuilder.Open(agentID);
9to1.AIStudio.AgentBuilder.UpdateDraft(agentID, patch, expectedRevision?);
9to1.AIStudio.AgentBuilder.Validate(agentID, revision?);
9to1.AIStudio.AgentBuilder.Preview(agentID, input, options?);
9to1.AIStudio.AgentBuilder.Activate(agentID, revision);
9to1.AIStudio.AgentBuilder.Share(agentID, principalID, role);
9to1.AIStudio.ToolBuilder.Create(type, config);
9to1.AIStudio.ToolBuilder.Validate(projectID);
9to1.AIStudio.ToolBuilder.Install(projectID);
9to1.AIStudio.Playground.Run(config, input);
9to1.AIStudio.Evaluations.Create(config);
9to1.AIStudio.Evaluations.Run(evalSuiteID, target, runProfileID?);
9to1.AIStudio.Tests.CreateSuite(config);
9to1.AIStudio.Tests.Run(testSuiteID, target, runProfileID?);
9to1.AIStudio.Replay.Open(runID);
9to1.AIStudio.Replay.RestartFrom(runID, nodeID, overrides?);
9to1.AIStudio.Schemas.Create(schema);
9to1.AIStudio.ModelRouters.Create(policy);
9to1.AIStudio.GenerativeUI.Create(definition);
9to1.AIStudio.RunProfiles.Create(profile);
9to1.AIStudio.ContextInspector.Get(runOrRequestID);
9to1.AIStudio.PermissionSimulator.Evaluate(config);
9to1.AIStudio.Dependencies.Get(entityRef);
9to1.AIStudio.Compare(inputs, options?);
9to1.AIStudio.Documentation.Generate(entityRef, format, options?);
These are minimum canonical entry points. User-visible operations across builders, test/debug tools and resources MUST have equivalent typed APIs under the global API-parity rule.
Failure behaviour
AI Studio MUST return structured failures including ProjectNotFound, AgentNotFound, InvalidDefinition, ValidationFailed, DependencyMissing, DependencyConflict, SchemaIncompatible, ModelCapabilityMismatch, PermissionDenied, PreviewSideEffectDenied, EvaluationTargetUnavailable, GraderUnavailable, TestAssertionFailed, ReplayPointUnavailable, ReplaySideEffectConflict, ContextUnavailable, RunProfileUnavailable, RouterInvalid, DocumentationGenerationFailed and RevisionConflict in addition to the global error contract.
Acceptance requirements
AI Studio is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
Navigation exposes Build, Test & Debug and Resources using the defined surfaces without treating Dulche Agents as duplicate AI Studio projects.
A Harness can be created from a template, validated and run through the real Dulche runtime with Action Graph visibility.
Harness advanced graph uses the shared Home Node Graph Framework and remains optional for simple Harnesses.
Agent Builder directly creates/edits a Den-backed Dulche Agent and preserves the structured Workspace-Agents-style layout including collapsed More Options.
Tool Builder can create/test/install Skill, Plugin and MCP outputs using their real Dulche contracts.
Playground can combine model/Agent/Skills/Plugins/context/Run Profile and exposes effective runtime details.
A Playground result can be saved as an Evaluation Case and deterministic Test where applicable.
Evaluations support structured cases/graders and distinguish deterministic results from model/human judgements.
Test Suites assert tool/action/schema/state/permission behaviour and preserve reproducible failing run data.
Replay opens an actual prior Dulche run and creates a safe branch/new run without mutating the original history.
Schema Builder exposes dependency impact before activating a breaking shared-schema revision.
Permission Simulator explains the actual effective permission outcome without executing the action.
Context Inspector shows included/retrieved/summarised/omitted context truthfully with provenance.
Model Router policies integrate with Universal Model Picker/fallback privacy rules rather than creating a competing model system.
Generative UI Builder restricts generated UI to approved CUI components/actions and validates accessibility/responsive behaviour.
Dependency Inspector detects missing/disabled/incompatible/cyclic dependencies and opens canonical entities.
Run Profiles alter execution environment/policy without mutating the underlying Agent/Harness/Tool definition.
Compare can compare compatible revisions/runs/models with outputs plus relevant eval/test/runtime differences.
Documentation Generator derives documentation from canonical definitions and preserves explicit merge/overwrite semantics.
Templates create independent entities with template provenance rather than shared mutable copies.
Authoring, validation, preview/test, install, activation and runtime execution remain separate permissioned lifecycle stages.
Close/reopen AI Studio preserves projects, drafts and resource state without making AI Studio the runtime owner.
Core operations across builders and test/debug/resources have equivalent typed API coverage.
Play
Product role
9to1 Play is the structured Agent-game framework and user-facing game surface where humans and Dulche Agents participate as contestants under explicit game rules. Play supports human-vs-Agent, Agent-vs-Agent, mixed teams and spectator-only matches. It is distinct from the built-in Experiences Space: Play owns formal games with contestant slots, rules, typed actions, visibility, turns/rounds, judging/scoring and winner conditions; Experiences owns open-ended conversational roleplay/simulation/story state.
The canonical reference experience is a generated maths quiz in which the user competes against ten AI Agent contestants. Each contestant receives the same authorised question state, submits independently, cannot see competitors' answers before reveal, and is scored by the game engine using deterministic maths validation where possible.
Game definitions and matches
A GameDefinition describes reusable game rules/configuration and MUST have stable GameDefinitionID plus version/revision. It MAY define title/description/category, contestant limits/roles, teams, rounds/turn structure, state schema, visibility rules, available typed actions, timing policy, scoring/judging policy, win/elimination conditions, capability profile, UI/Generative UI definition, model requirements and template provenance.
A Match is one concrete execution of a GameDefinition and MUST have stable MatchID, GameDefinitionID/GameRevision, Contestants, MatchState, current round/turn, scores, timing state, judge policy, visibility policy, status, ActionGraphID, created/updated timestamps and recovery/checkpoint metadata where supported.
Starting a Match snapshots or pins the GameDefinition revision used for that Match. Later edits to the game definition MUST NOT silently alter an in-progress Match.
Contestants
Every contestant MUST have stable ContestantID within the Match and a contestant type such as Human, DulcheAgent or SessionAgent. Agent contestants MAY additionally reference canonical AgentID/DefinitionRevision or a session-scoped temporary Agent configuration, model policy, team, display identity, score/status and applicable game capability profile.
Persistent Dulche Agents remain canonical Den-backed Agents with their normal identity/memory policy. Play MUST NOT clone them into private Play Agents. A persistent Agent participating in a Match receives only the game-authorised contestant view/capabilities for that Match.
SessionAgent contestants are lightweight temporary game participants used when the user asks for generated/random opponents. They MAY have name/personality/strategy/model configuration for the Match but MUST NOT become permanent Den Agents unless the user explicitly saves/promotes them.
Play MAY provide built-in contestant archetypes such as careful/accurate, fast/risky or balanced where appropriate. Such behavioural profiles may influence strategy/timing but MUST NOT alter objective truth, answer keys or hidden game rules.
Contestant selection and automatic filling
Game setup MUST support manual contestant selection from available Dulche Agents plus automatic creation/filling of remaining SessionAgent slots. The user may specify opponent count, model/Agent mix, team structure and broad difficulty/strategy policy where the GameDefinition supports it.
Play MAY support model-vs-model style matches by assigning different explicit model policies to SessionAgent contestants, provided each still participates through the same contestant/action contract. The UI MUST disclose the effective model/Agent configuration when that distinction is relevant to the game.
Isolation, visibility and fairness
Play MUST enforce contestant-specific context isolation at the runtime/data layer rather than relying only on instructions such as 'do not cheat'. Before every Agent turn, the canonical MatchState is filtered through the GameDefinition visibility policy to produce that contestant's authorised view.
A contestant MUST NOT receive another contestant's hidden answer/action, reference solution, hidden role, private inventory/state, unrevealed future round content, judge internals or other protected information unless the rules explicitly reveal it.
Hidden-role, deduction and asymmetric-information games MAY assign different private state to each contestant. Private state MUST remain inaccessible to unauthorised contestants, spectator views and model context even if all participants are represented within the same Match.
Where fairness requires simultaneous decisions, submissions MUST remain sealed until all eligible contestants have submitted or the configured deadline expires. Reveal is a separate state transition.
Canonical game state and rules
Match truth MUST live in canonical structured MatchState rather than in generated commentary. Narrative/UI text may describe a state transition only after the corresponding typed transition is accepted by the game engine.
GameDefinition rules MUST be enforceable independently from contestant prompts where practical. Typed constraints may cover legal moves, resource limits, turn ownership, score bounds, prerequisites, timers, elimination, visibility and other deterministic rules. An Agent proposing an illegal action receives a structured rejection and may retry according to game policy.
Rule-critical data such as quiz answer keys, legal move generation or score calculations SHOULD use deterministic evaluators where technically appropriate rather than an LLM judge.
Typed game actions
Agents and humans interact with a Match through GameDefinition-declared typed actions. Play MUST NOT depend on parsing arbitrary prose to infer critical actions when a structured action contract is available.
Examples include SubmitAnswer, SelectOption, MakeMove, PlaceBid, ChooseTarget, Pass, Vote, SubmitCreativeEntry or EndTurn. Every available action MUST define input schema, visibility/availability conditions, validation rules and whether the action is reversible before resolution.
Agent contestants receive only the actions currently available to them. Calling an unavailable/illegal action returns a structured error without mutating MatchState.
Rounds, turns and timing
Play MUST support at least Sequential, Simultaneous and RealTimeLike timing models where required by a GameDefinition. Quiz/race games SHOULD support simultaneous submission; board/strategy games may use sequential turns; other games may use event/timer-driven phases.
When speed affects scoring, Play MUST record authoritative presentation/start and submission timestamps from the Match runtime rather than trusting contestant-supplied timing. Pauses/reconnects MUST follow the GameDefinition timing policy and be represented explicitly.
Round state SHOULD expose at least Pending, Active, AwaitingSubmissions, Resolving, Revealed and Completed or equivalent typed phases where applicable.
Judging and scoring
Every GameDefinition that scores or selects winners MUST declare a JudgePolicy/ScoringPolicy. The policy MAY use deterministic rules, human voting, one or more Dulche judge Agents, rubric-based model grading or a combination.
Objective domains MUST prefer deterministic evaluation when available. For example, maths answers should use symbolic/numeric validation rather than asking an LLM which contestant 'looks correct'. Subjective games such as slogan or creative-writing competitions MAY use transparent Agent/human rubric judging.
If model/Agent judging is used, Play MUST record judge identity/model/revision, rubric, inputs available to the judge and resulting score/reasoning artifact where policy allows. A judge MUST NOT receive contestant identity when blind judging is part of the game rules.
Scores, penalties, tie-breaks, eliminations and winner resolution MUST be derived from the GameDefinition rules and stored as canonical Match events/state rather than only rendered text.
Tools and capability profiles
A GameDefinition MUST declare the game-specific capability profile available to Agent contestants. Tools such as web search, calculators, code execution, Files, Plugins or external connectors may be Allowed, Denied or constrained per game/role.
Disallowed capabilities MUST be removed/blocked at runtime rather than merely discouraged in instructions. A no-calculator maths quiz cannot expose calculator/code/web tools to Agent contestants. A research contest may explicitly permit them.
External consequential 9to1 actions are denied by default for Play contestants unless the GameDefinition explicitly integrates an approved capability and normal Home permission/approval policy permits it. Simulated game actions MUST remain clearly distinct from real-world side effects.
Teams and collaboration
Play MUST support optional team membership where the GameDefinition permits it. Teams MAY mix human and Agent contestants. Visibility policy may expose team-private state/chat while hiding it from opposing teams.
A team game may therefore support Human + Agents versus Agents, multiple human/Agent teams or other configured compositions without changing the underlying contestant identity/action model.
Spectator mode
Play MUST support spectator-only Matches in which Agents compete while the user watches. Spectator UI MAY expose live round/turn state, locked/submitted indicators, permitted public reasoning/status, reveal events, scores/leaderboard and replay controls according to the GameDefinition visibility policy.
Spectators MUST NOT automatically gain access to hidden contestant/judge state merely because they are not playing. Debug/developer visibility is a separate explicit permissioned mode.
Game creation and quick starts
Play MUST support conversational game creation from a natural-language request, for example 'Make a 15-question A-Level Maths quiz with increasing difficulty where I compete against 10 AI contestants'. The creation flow resolves that request into an inspectable structured GameDefinition before or as the Match starts.
The Play landing page SHOULD provide Create with AI, quick-start categories/templates, Continue/Recent Matches, saved/favourite GameDefinitions and available shared templates. Candidate categories MAY include Quiz/Knowledge, Strategy, Creative, Deduction/Social and Collaborative/Team games.
Generated games MUST be real GameDefinitions with typed rules/state/actions rather than a one-off prompt pretending to be a game.
UI and Generative UI
Play MAY use CUI/Generative UI for question cards, timers, answer controls, boards, maps, cards, inventories, contestant panels, scoreboards, leaderboards, reveal animations and other game-specific interfaces. Generated UI MUST bind to typed Play actions/state and MUST NOT become an alternate unsynchronised game engine.
For a quiz, the primary screen SHOULD make the current question, user's answer control, contestant submission status, round state and leaderboard understandable without exposing hidden answers before reveal.
Voice, images and multimodality
Play MAY use Vision & Voice while preserving the same MatchID/ContestantID/state. Voice is another input/output modality for the Match rather than a separate game session.
GameDefinitions MAY use images, generated visuals or other media as questions, assets or submissions where supported. Persistent continuity-critical assets MUST receive canonical asset identity/references rather than being regenerated unpredictably each turn.
Checkpoints, reconnect and replay
Play SHOULD checkpoint canonical MatchState at safe phase/round boundaries and support reconnect/recovery where the game permits. Recovery MUST preserve sealed submissions, scores and resolved side effects rather than restarting a round invisibly.
Replay/history SHOULD be derived from canonical Match events and Action Graph. A debug/replay branch MUST NOT alter the original completed Match history.
Play and Experiences interoperability
Play and the Experiences Space are separate products over shared Dulche/Home primitives. Experiences MAY launch a Play Match for a formal competition inside a broader scenario; Play MAY offer Continue in Experiences for open-ended continuation after a Match. Any handoff MUST explicitly map permitted state/artifacts rather than treating MatchState and ExperienceState as the same object.
Canonical Play API
9to1.Play.ListGames();
9to1.Play.GetGame(gameDefinitionID, revision?);
9to1.Play.CreateGame(definition);
9to1.Play.GenerateGame(prompt, options?);
9to1.Play.UpdateGame(gameDefinitionID, patch, expectedRevision?);
9to1.Play.ValidateGame(gameDefinitionID, revision?);
9to1.Play.StartMatch(gameDefinitionID, config?);
9to1.Play.GetMatch(matchID);
9to1.Play.ListContestants(matchID);
9to1.Play.AddContestant(matchID, contestantConfig);
9to1.Play.RemoveContestant(matchID, contestantID);
9to1.Play.FillAgentSlots(matchID, policy);
9to1.Play.GetContestantView(matchID, contestantID);
9to1.Play.ListActions(matchID, contestantID);
9to1.Play.PerformAction(matchID, contestantID, actionID, input?);
9to1.Play.SubmitAnswer(matchID, contestantID, answer);
9to1.Play.GetRound(matchID, roundID?);
9to1.Play.ResolveRound(matchID, roundID);
9to1.Play.GetLeaderboard(matchID);
9to1.Play.PauseMatch(matchID);
9to1.Play.ResumeMatch(matchID);
9to1.Play.EndMatch(matchID);
9to1.Play.CreateCheckpoint(matchID);
9to1.Play.GetReplay(matchID);
9to1.Play.ContinueInExperiences(matchID, options?);
These are minimum canonical entry points. Every user-visible game/match/contestant action MUST have equivalent typed API coverage under the global API-parity rule.
Failure behaviour
Play MUST return structured failures including GameNotFound, GameRevisionUnavailable, InvalidGameDefinition, MatchNotFound, MatchAlreadyStarted, MatchNotJoinable, ContestantNotFound, ContestantNotEligible, ContestantViewDenied, NotContestantTurn, RoundNotActive, SubmissionAlreadyLocked, SubmissionDeadlinePassed, ActionUnavailable, IllegalAction, CapabilityDeniedByGame, JudgeUnavailable, ResolutionFailed, RecoveryUnavailable and RevisionConflict in addition to normal Dulche/Home/tool failures.
Acceptance requirements
Play is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
A user can generate and start a maths quiz against ten AI Agent contestants from a natural-language request.
Persistent Dulche Agents can enter a Match without being cloned into a Play-private Agent registry.
Automatically filled SessionAgent opponents remain session-scoped unless explicitly saved.
Every contestant receives an isolated authorised view and cannot access sealed competitors' answers, hidden roles or judge/reference state.
A simultaneous quiz keeps submissions sealed until reveal/deadline and records authoritative timing when speed affects scoring.
Maths correctness/scoring uses deterministic validation where available rather than an unnecessary LLM judge.
Agent contestants act through typed game actions and illegal/unavailable actions fail without mutating MatchState.
Game-specific tool restrictions are enforced at runtime, including a no-web/no-code/no-calculator quiz profile.
Teams can mix humans and Agents while team-private state remains isolated from opponents.
An Agent-vs-Agent spectator Match can run without the user occupying a contestant slot.
Canonical MatchState remains authoritative over generated narrative/UI text.
Reconnect/recovery preserves locked submissions, scores and already-resolved state.
Play can hand off explicitly to an Experiences Space without merging MatchState and ExperienceState implicitly.
Core game creation, Match, contestant, action, scoring and replay operations have equivalent typed API coverage.
Productivity Apps
Write
Product role
9to1 Write is the production document/word-processing surface. It MUST behave like a mature word processor rather than a web editor, site builder, Markdown editor, collection of HTML blocks or browser contenteditable surface. LibreOffice Writer/LibreOfficeKit is the mature donor/layout/format engine for text-oriented documents; 9to1 owns the CUI shell, shared Productivity Engine integration, collaboration, AI, Sections model and native extensions.
The document surface MUST use an actual structured document model with paragraph/run/style/section/table/object/reference/review semantics and real layout/text measurement. Caret movement, selection, rich clipboard, IME input, undo/redo transactions, object anchoring, line wrapping, pagination, spelling/grammar ranges, accessibility semantics and large-document behaviour MUST be implemented as document-editor behaviour, not emulated with disconnected DOM widgets.
Continuous view is a presentation of the same structured word-processing document, not conversion into HTML. A document MUST switch between supported views without changing its canonical content or losing document semantics.
Donor parity and objective word-processor behaviour
All applicable LibreOffice Writer functionality, quality-of-life behaviour, keyboard interactions, menus/workflows and file-format depth MUST be preserved or appropriately adapted unless technically impossible and explicitly documented. The donor source is authoritative for inherited functionality; Write MUST NOT ship as a simplified rich-text clone simply because a smaller editor is easier to implement.
Inherited/core capability includes, where applicable, character and paragraph formatting; custom styles; page styles; headers/footers; sections; columns; page/section breaks; lists/outlines; tables; images/drawings/shapes; equations; fields; bookmarks; cross-references; captions; footnotes/endnotes; tables of contents; indexes; citations/bibliographies; comments; tracked changes; document comparison; spelling/grammar/language features; find/replace; hyphenation; print/page layout; mail merge; document properties; object anchoring/wrapping; export/print and other mature Writer functionality.
Launch and file entry
Write opens to the shared modern Launch Screen contract with Blank document, Templates, Recent, Favourites, Shared with me, search, Open and Import. Entries MUST be backed by real Files/Drive data rather than mock cards. Creating/opening/importing a document establishes the canonical Write artifact before entering the editor.
Editor shell
Write MUST NOT use a permanent Office-style ribbon. The editing shell consists of a document-title row, a floating contextual toolbar immediately below the title at the top of the document area, an optional collapsible Sections sidebar, the document canvas and the persistent shared AI bar at the bottom.
The Home button sits immediately to the left of the document title and opens an Office-style backstage/file menu for document-level operations such as Info, New, Open, Recent, Save/Save a copy, Share, Export, Print, Version history, Document properties and Settings. Closing the menu returns to the same document/selection position.
Floating contextual toolbar
The floating toolbar stays in a stable position immediately below the title while its contextual controls change according to the current semantic selection. Text, heading, image, table, reference/review and other contexts expose their own relevant operations. An operation that cannot apply to the current selection MUST NOT appear merely because it exists elsewhere in Write; for example Crop image cannot appear when no image is selected.
Three controls are persistent regardless of selection: +, Eye and overflow […]. They remain present even as all other controls change. When horizontal space is constrained, lower-priority contextual actions move into overflow before these persistent controls disappear.
The overflow […] menu contains additional actions relevant to the current context that did not fit or were deprioritised on the main bar. It is not a generic dump of all Write commands. The menu for a table selection differs from the menu for text or an image and MUST exclude inapplicable actions.
Right-click/context menus expose the same semantic action model in menu form. Context menus and the floating bar call the same typed Write/Productivity APIs rather than maintaining parallel behaviour.
Pinned toolbar actions
Users MUST be able to pin supported contextual actions to the top bar and reorder/reset their pinned preferences. Pinning means prioritise this action whenever it is applicable; it MUST NOT force an irrelevant disabled action to occupy the toolbar in unrelated contexts. Pinning is per-user UI preference rather than collaborative document state.
Toolbar priority SHOULD resolve from the most important current-context control, then applicable user-pinned controls, then common contextual actions, followed by the persistent +, Eye and […] controls.
Universal Insert (+)
The persistent + control is the universal Insert entry point. It opens a searchable, context-aware insertion palette rather than requiring an Insert ribbon. The complete palette MUST expose applicable content/structure/reference/9to1 artifact options while prioritising items relevant to the current caret/object context.
Insertion types SHOULD include tables, images, drawings, equations, code blocks, text boxes, shapes/callouts, horizontal lines, page/section breaks, columns, headers/footers, footnotes, citations, cross-references, bookmarks, captions, table of contents, special characters, fields, links/files and supported embedded 9to1 artifacts such as Canvas, Board, Data ranges/charts, Picture, Planner items, Maps and Graphs.
Eye / visibility controls
The persistent Eye control owns view/visibility options rather than document-format mutations. Its menu MUST include the current Write View mode and may include Sections visibility, Comments, spelling/grammar marks, formatting marks, ruler, page boundaries, object anchors, alignment/snap guides and the floating word/character count where applicable.
Most Eye settings are per-user view preferences and MUST NOT change what collaborators see. Contextually useful visibility aids MAY appear only when relevant, for example object bounds/anchors/guides when an object is selected.
Floating document statistics
When enabled from Eye, an unobtrusive document-statistics indicator floats in the bottom-right of the document area without becoming document content or consuming page layout. It SHOULD show document word and character counts, and when text is selected it SHOULD prioritise selection word/character counts. Clicking it MAY reveal expanded statistics such as characters without spaces and page count where meaningful.
The statistics indicator and bottom AI bar MUST coexist without overlap at supported sizes.
Sections sidebar
Write has a Google-Docs-inspired collapsible Sections sidebar on the left. The product terminology is Sections, not Tabs. A Section is a stable user-created structural division of the same Write document and MAY contain nested Sections. Headings inside each Section are derived automatically from document heading/outline styles.
Every Section MUST have stable SectionID, DocumentID, optional ParentSectionID, Name, optional icon/metadata, ordering and revision/state information. Renaming/reordering/nesting MUST preserve SectionID so links, AI context and cross-references are not tied to visible names.
The expanded sidebar presents Sections as stronger/root nodes with the heading hierarchy beneath each Section. Clicking a heading navigates to it; changing heading style updates the outline live. Moving a heading moves its heading plus subordinate content using structured document operations. Moving a Section moves the Section's canonical content safely.
The sidebar has a + control for New section, New subsection, From selection and supported Import-as-section workflows. Section/headings support context actions such as rename, duplicate, move before/after/into, copy link, export section, delete and relevant AI/translation operations.
The Sections sidebar MUST be collapsible to a narrow edge/rail and resizable when expanded. Collapsed/expanded state and width are per-user/device preferences. Collapsing immediately returns horizontal space to the document canvas; navigation/AI actions MUST NOT forcibly reopen it. On narrow layouts the sidebar becomes a temporary drawer. Keyboard and non-drag movement/navigation alternatives are mandatory.
The Sections sidebar and an inserted Table of Contents are distinct. The sidebar is editing/navigation structure; + → Table of contents inserts a real document object generated from configured heading levels/styles.
View modes
Eye exposes three first-class Write View modes: Continuous, Pages and Book. Switching view is immediate presentation state over the same DocumentID, SectionIDs, ObjectIDs, selection, comments and revision. The user's view mode does not force collaborators into the same view.
Continuous is the default for new .9to1w documents unless the chosen template requires another view. It presents one seamless pageless writing surface with a sensible readable content width and no artificial sheet gaps. Real page breaks remain canonical and are shown as unobtrusive markers rather than forcing paper sheets.
Continuous view MUST retain page-aware document features such as headers/footers, footnotes, page numbers, margins, section/page breaks and columns in the underlying document model. The view may present them contextually rather than permanently rendering every page boundary.
Pages renders exact page layout using modern rounded pages, restrained elevation, clean spacing and a neutral workspace while preserving true margins, headers/footers, footnotes, page numbers and print pagination. It MUST not use dated harsh page chrome merely because the donor does.
Book renders publication-aware facing-page spreads and supports odd/even pages, right/left page semantics, mirrored inside/outside margins, binding gutter, different left/right headers/footers, section starts/front matter and deliberate blank-page behaviour. Narrow displays MAY show one page at a time while preserving spread semantics.
View mode is independent from Locked/Unlocked layout mode. Supported combinations include Continuous + Locked, Continuous + Unlocked, Pages + Locked, Pages + Unlocked, Book + Locked and Book + Unlocked.
Locked and Unlocked layout
Write MUST implement the same first-class Locked/Unlocked layout concept as Boards. LayoutMode is independent from the user's current View mode and from AI Read/Write mode.
Locked is the conventional word-processing flow and the default for ordinary documents. Paragraphs/inline content follow document structure and supported objects use anchors/wrapping rules so accidental free positioning is constrained.
Unlocked adds a professional free-positioned visual object layer for supported images, text boxes, shapes, drawings, charts, embedded artifacts, callouts, equations and tables where applicable. Users may drag, resize, rotate, overlap, layer, align, distribute and snap these objects without converting the whole document into arbitrary floating text boxes.
Unlocked object controls MUST support position/size/rotation; page/Section/paragraph/character anchoring where meaningful; inline/square/tight/behind/in-front/custom wrapping; aspect and position locks; z-order; align/distribute; grouping; snapping to margins, columns, guides, text bounds and other objects; and accessible non-drag alternatives.
Switching layout modes MUST preserve data and positions as far as the target representation supports. If an object cannot be represented safely under the requested mode/foreign format, Write MUST warn rather than silently discard/flatten it.
Styles and custom styles
Custom styles MUST be first-class and front-and-centre whenever the selected content supports styles. For text, the active semantic style control SHOULD normally be the first contextual toolbar control rather than leading with raw font/size controls.
Write MUST support built-in and arbitrary custom character/paragraph/document styles with stable StyleID, inheritance/overrides where supported, modify/create/update-from-selection, usage inspection and import/copy of style sets. Styles MAY control typography, paragraph/line spacing, indentation, alignment, borders/background, list behaviour, pagination/keep-with-next, language, outline level and semantic/accessibility role.
Changing a shared/custom style MUST update linked uses while preserving explicit local overrides according to the style model. Write SHOULD preview the scope/impact of broad style changes where useful.
Equivalent reusable style concepts SHOULD exist for tables and other supported object classes where they provide real value; these remain canonical style definitions rather than visual presets copied independently into each object.
Tables
Tables MUST support mature Writer/Office-level editing plus a stronger native .9to1w styling model. The contextual toolbar for a table SHOULD prioritise active Table Style plus common Borders, Fill, Padding, Alignment and structural actions, with less-common relevant actions in […].
Whole-table controls MUST include width/height and fixed/content/flexible sizing as supported; alignment; wrapping; position/anchor; table padding/margins; background/opacity; border; shadow; caption; repeating header rows; pagination/split behaviour; and native rounded-corner support.
Native .9to1w tables MUST support table corner radius, including linked or independent top-left/top-right/bottom-right/bottom-left radii. Foreign export MUST preserve this where the target format can represent it or explicitly warn/use a documented compatibility representation when it cannot.
Row/column controls SHOULD include explicit/flexible/min/max sizing, equal distribution, visibility/header designation, keep-together and appropriate responsive/fixed behaviour. Cell controls MUST include independent top/right/bottom/left padding, horizontal/vertical alignment, text direction, background/fill, border per side, border width/style/colour/opacity, merge/split, minimum dimensions and defined overflow behaviour.
Border editing MUST distinguish outer border, inner horizontal, inner vertical and individual cell edges. Cell padding MUST be directly discoverable and support linked/unlinked values rather than being buried in an obscure properties dialog.
Custom Table Styles MUST be reusable first-class definitions capable of controlling whole-table appearance, header rows, first/last columns, odd/even rows, typography, borders, corner radius, cell padding, alignment and backgrounds. Linked tables update when the style changes except for explicit local overrides.
Images, drawings and positioned objects
Images and visual objects MUST support professional crop, resize, aspect ratio, wrap, anchor, positioning, z-order, caption, alt text, replacement and supported compression/export controls. The shared Rnote-derived drawing object is used for handwriting/sketch/annotation/diagram content so supported drawings remain editable across Write, Boards and Canvas.
Multiple selected free objects expose align/distribute/group operations. Object controls and […] overflow remain contextual; irrelevant image controls MUST not appear for text/table selections.
References and document structure
References is a first-class semantic capability even though Write does not expose a permanent References ribbon. +, contextual controls, right-click and […] provide footnotes/endnotes, citations/bibliography, table of contents, captions, cross-references, bookmarks, indexes and fields where supported.
Citation/reference data MUST be structured rather than only formatted prose so Agents and APIs can insert, validate, update and export references safely. Section/heading links and cross-references SHOULD use stable IDs rather than visible text/page numbers as identity.
Review, comments and collaboration
Write MUST support comments, tracked/suggested changes, accept/reject, previous/next change, document comparison and version history using real document/review semantics. AI edits in Suggest mode create suggestions rather than silently accepted direct changes.
Realtime collaboration MUST use the normal 9to1 shared-artifact model for presence, cursors/selections, concurrent editing, comments, permissions/sharing and revision/conflict semantics. Naive timestamp last-writer-wins overwrite is non-conformant.
Native format and foreign document formats
.9to1w is the versioned native Write format and MUST preserve the full native document model, stable Productivity object identity, Sections, custom styles/table styles, embedded 9to1 artifact references, review/collaboration metadata, drawings/graphs, supported AI provenance and native features that foreign formats cannot represent. Migrations MUST be deterministic and preserve compatible unknown optional data.
Write MUST support reliable DOCX and ODT import/export plus supported Markdown/TXT interchange and PDF export. Import/export fidelity is a release criterion, not a demo feature. Unsupported or lossy foreign-format behaviour MUST be surfaced rather than silently deleting content to force compatibility.
PDF opening and editing
Write MUST open and edit PDFs as first-class fixed-layout documents; PDF support is not export-only and MUST NOT simply convert every PDF into HTML or an approximate web editor. The Write shell remains consistent while an appropriate PDF/page-object engine (including applicable LibreOffice Draw/PDF capabilities or equivalent mature implementation) owns fixed-layout PDF object semantics.
A digitally structured PDF SHOULD preserve selectable/editable native text, fonts, images, vector/page objects, links, annotations, forms/layers where supported and page geometry. Such PDFs default to Pages view and Unlocked layout because fixed page geometry is intrinsic.
Scanned PDFs MUST be recognised as image/scanned content rather than falsely presented as native text. Write SHOULD offer explicit Recognise text/OCR-style transformation, preserve correspondence to the original page image and expose uncertain/low-confidence recognition rather than claiming perfect extraction. Mixed PDFs are handled page/object-by-page/object rather than forcing one simplistic document-wide mode.
PDF editing MUST support useful fixed-layout workflows where technically supported: editing/moving existing text blocks, inserting/deleting text, images and objects, resize/crop, drawings/shapes, page rearrange/insert/delete/rotate, combine/extract pages, links, annotations/comments/highlights, proper redaction, supported form fields/signatures and headers/footers/page numbers.
Before the first destructive PDF save, Write MUST preserve an original recoverable revision/backup and maintain normal version history. PDF AI operations use semantic PDF text/object structure when available and MUST NOT OCR screenshots of text that the PDF already exposes semantically.
Continuous MUST NOT be forced onto a fixed-layout PDF. PDF defaults to Pages; only views/reflow operations that are meaningful for the active PDF are exposed, with fidelity implications made explicit.
Persistent AI bar in Write
Write implements the platform-wide shared AI-bar Read-only / Write-mode contract. In Read-only, Dulche can semantically inspect/search/compare the full authorised document, including off-screen Sections, headings, objects, styles, comments, references, tables and embedded artifact metadata, but cannot mutate the document. In Write mode it can use typed Write/Productivity actions subject to host editing/review/permission state.
The AI context MUST expose stable DocumentID, document revision, current SectionID/heading/object, selection ranges/ObjectIDs, document structure, styles, comments, references, tables/images/embedded artifacts and available typed actions as authorised. Viewport visibility is not the AI's document boundary. Visual rendering may supplement this when layout must be inspected, but semantic access is primary.
AI Read/Write mode is separate from document Edit/Suggest/View and Locked/Unlocked. For example AI Write mode + Suggest creates tracked suggestions; AI Write mode + Edit may perform direct typed edits; AI Read-only always prohibits mutations. The bar MUST NOT use mouse/keyboard simulation instead of Write APIs.
The AI bar supports actions such as rewrite/shorten/expand, restructure, create/move Sections, apply/change styles, manipulate tables, insert objects/references, inspect missing citations, translate, compare Sections and perform other authorised semantic edits. Broad edits remain revision-safe, undoable/versioned and subject to normal conflict handling.
Agents, sources and Translate integration
Write MAY expose applicable Global, Write-scoped, Space and contextual Dulche Agents through the shared Agent picker. Specialist writing Agents such as Editor, Proofreader, Citation Assistant or Long-form Writer are canonical Dulche Agents, not private hard-coded AI runtimes.
Documents MAY reference authorised source sets/files without unnecessarily duplicating them into the document. Source-backed AI work SHOULD preserve provenance where appropriate.
Selection-level Translate invokes Dulche Translate directly for simple translation. Continue in Translate opens/preserves context in the built-in Translate Space for larger localisation workflows. Whole-document translation can produce separate Write derivatives/locale variants while preserving structure and source provenance.
Embedded 9to1 artifacts and interoperability
Write MAY embed/reference supported Boards, Canvas, Data ranges/charts, Picture assets, Planner items, Maps, Graphs and other canonical 9to1 artifacts as live embeds, linked previews or explicit snapshots according to the target type and permissions. Embedding MUST reference canonical entities rather than creating unmanaged duplicate state.
Shared Productivity Engine bundles and object identities MUST support rich cross-app copy/paste/conversion where semantics are compatible; unsupported conversion MUST fail explicitly rather than silently flattening required behaviour.
Navigation, search and long-document performance
Write MUST provide document search/find-replace and efficient navigation for large documents. Sections/headings are semantic navigation, not a DOM outline derived from whatever is currently rendered. Long documents MUST not require eagerly rendering every page/object to remain editable.
Switching Continuous/Pages/Book, opening/collapsing Sections, enabling counts/marks and changing selections MUST avoid unnecessary full-document re-rendering where the document engine can update incrementally.
Recovery, persistence and accessibility
Write MUST support autosave, unsaved-draft protection, crash recovery, revision/version history, conflict recovery and safe interrupted-save behaviour. A crash or partial write MUST not casually lose a user's document. Save/reopen workflows are part of acceptance testing.
Keyboard-only operation, screen-reader semantics, focus indicators, scalable typography/zoom, accessible toolbar/context menus, non-drag alternatives for movement/layout, readable selection/review state and narrow-screen adaptation are mandatory. The Sections drawer, toolbar, floating statistics and AI bar must remain usable without overlap at supported scale factors.
Canonical Write API
9to1.Write.Create(config);
9to1.Write.Open(documentRef);
9to1.Write.GetDocument(documentID);
9to1.Write.Save(documentID);
9to1.Write.GetSelection(documentID);
9to1.Write.Insert(documentID, location, object);
9to1.Write.Replace(documentID, rangeOrObjectID, content);
9to1.Write.Delete(documentID, rangeOrObjectID);
9to1.Write.Sections.List(documentID);
9to1.Write.Sections.Create(documentID, config);
9to1.Write.Sections.Move(documentID, sectionID, target);
9to1.Write.Sections.Update(documentID, sectionID, patch);
9to1.Write.SetViewMode(documentID, mode);
9to1.Write.SetLayoutMode(documentID, mode);
9to1.Write.Styles.List(documentID);
9to1.Write.Styles.Create(documentID, definition);
9to1.Write.Styles.Update(documentID, styleID, patch);
9to1.Write.Tables.Get(documentID, tableID);
9to1.Write.Tables.Update(documentID, tableID, patch);
9to1.Write.Tables.SetStyle(documentID, tableID, tableStyleID);
9to1.Write.References.Insert(documentID, type, config);
9to1.Write.Comments.List(documentID);
9to1.Write.Comments.Create(documentID, target, content);
9to1.Write.Changes.SetMode(documentID, mode);
9to1.Write.Changes.Accept(documentID, changeID);
9to1.Write.Changes.Reject(documentID, changeID);
9to1.Write.Images.Update(documentID, objectID, patch);
9to1.Write.Objects.Position(documentID, objectID, placement);
9to1.Write.PDF.Open(fileRef);
9to1.Write.PDF.RecogniseText(documentID, scope, options?);
9to1.Write.PDF.EditObject(documentID, objectID, patch);
9to1.Write.PDF.Pages.Reorder(documentID, order);
9to1.Write.Export(documentID, format, options?);
These are minimum canonical entry points. Every user-visible Write operation, including contextual toolbar, context-menu, Sections, view/layout, review, PDF and AI-triggered operations, MUST have equivalent typed API coverage under the global parity rule.
Failure behaviour
Write MUST return structured failures including DocumentNotFound, UnsupportedDocumentVersion, ImportUnsupported, ImportLossy, ExportUnsupported, ExportLossy, SectionNotFound, StyleNotFound, TableNotFound, ObjectNotFound, InvalidRange, RevisionConflict, PermissionDenied, ReadOnlyDocument, LayoutConversionLoss, PDFUnsupported, PDFObjectNotEditable, OCRUnavailable, OCRUncertain, PDFBackupFailed, RecoveryUnavailable and ProviderUnavailable in addition to shared Home/Dulche/Files failures.
Acceptance requirements
Write is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
Write uses a real structured word-processing/document engine and is not implemented as a generic HTML/contenteditable/web editor.
A new .9to1w opens in Continuous view by default and can switch to Pages and Book without changing canonical content or losing selection/state.
Pages renders modern rounded pages with exact pagination; Book renders correct facing-page/book layout semantics.
The floating contextual toolbar sits directly beneath the title, stays positionally stable and changes only to relevant controls.
+, Eye and […] remain persistent across text, image, table and other selection contexts.
[…] contains only additional actions relevant to the current context; inapplicable actions such as Crop with no image are absent.
Users can pin/reorder contextual actions and pinned actions appear only when applicable.
+ opens a real searchable insertion palette that inserts supported document/reference/9to1 objects.
Eye toggles view/visibility features including Continuous/Pages/Book, Sections and word/character count where applicable.
Floating word/character count appears at bottom-right without becoming document content or overlapping the AI bar.
The Sections sidebar is collapsible/resizable, uses stable SectionIDs, includes live heading outline and supports nested Sections and accessible movement.
Locked mode preserves conventional document flow; Unlocked mode provides real free placement, z-order, snapping, alignment/distribution and wrapping without converting normal body text into arbitrary boxes.
Custom text styles are front-and-centre in applicable contexts and create/update/apply through stable StyleIDs.
Native tables support reusable custom Table Styles, independent cell padding, advanced borders and rounded corners including independent corner radii.
Write preserves applicable LibreOffice Writer donor functionality/QoL rather than shipping a simplified editor.
DOCX and ODT import/export plus native .9to1w and supported Markdown/TXT/PDF export complete real save-close-reopen workflows with fidelity checks.
Write opens digital, scanned and mixed PDFs through an appropriate fixed-layout editor, defaults PDFs to Pages/Unlocked and never pretends scanned text is native.
PDF text/object/page editing and destructive-save backup/version recovery work for supported PDF cases; backup failure is surfaced rather than ignored.
The shared AI bar can semantically read the entire authorised document in Read-only mode and cannot mutate it.
AI Write mode edits through typed APIs and obeys Edit/Suggest/View, permission, undo/version and conflict semantics.
AI context is not limited to the viewport and does not substitute screenshot/OCR for available semantic document/PDF text.
Realtime collaboration preserves concurrent edits/comments/review without naive timestamp last-writer-wins data loss.
Crash/interrupted-save recovery and realistic create/open-edit-save-close-reopen validation preserve document content.
Toolbar, Sections, page/book views, review state, free-layout controls and AI bar remain keyboard/screen-reader/zoom accessible.
Core Write operations have equivalent typed API coverage and no visible toolbar/menu action is a placeholder or disconnected fake.
Write MUST use Home’s Shared Productivity Engine for every shared object type it supports. Shared objects copied between Write, Present, Canvas, Boards and Spaces MUST preserve the common object schema, formatting and behaviour rather than being converted into Write-only representations.
Present
Purpose, ownership and conformance
9-1 Present is the CUI presentation authoring, presenting and interactive-runtime application. LibreOffice Impress/Draw is the donor foundation for applicable mature presentation editing, interoperability and quality-of-life behaviour. 9-1 owns the CUI shell, the native .9to1p model, the Actions runtime, typed APIs, AI integration, component model and cross-app semantics.
Applicable donor functionality MUST be preserved unless a scoped donor-parity exception is recorded in the canonical donor-parity manifest. Present MUST NOT ship as a reduced slide editor whose only conformance evidence is file opening or basic text/shape editing.
Present MUST use Home's Shared Productivity Engine for every registered shared object type that it supports. Shared text, tables, charts/graphs, images/media, drawings/ink and other shared objects copied between Present, Write, Canvas, Boards and Spaces MUST preserve the shared object schema, semantic identifiers, formatting, accessibility metadata and clipboard representation.
Release boundary:
Present owns PresentationID, SlideID, slide order, slide composition, presentation-level state, slide-local state, speaker notes references, presentation sessions and the Actions graph.
Home owns shared productivity object schemas, permission brokerage, shared AI/runtime services, common clipboard bundles and other platform services defined in Home.
Present MUST NOT introduce a second private implementation of a Home-owned shared object or platform service.
The native .9to1p representation is authoritative for full-fidelity 9-1 behaviour.
Normative applicability and capability negotiation
Terms such as applicable, supported and available are not discretionary escape hatches in this section. They are resolved from explicit manifests or runtime capability declarations.
A donor feature is applicable unless it is classified in the Present donor-parity manifest as Replace with 9-1-native equivalent or Not applicable with a recorded technical/legal reason.
A platform capability is supported only when the platform capability registry declares the required capability and version for the active device/runtime.
A file-format construct is representable only when the import/export capability matrix declares a mapping for the source construct and target format/version.
Failure of a required capability check MUST produce a typed unavailable/unsupported result and the specified fallback or CompatibilityIssue; silent omission is prohibited.
An implementation MUST NOT reinterpret a MUST requirement as optional merely because its current code path does not implement the required capability.
Landing page, file lifecycle and persistence
Present MUST implement the global launch-screen contract. The launch surface MUST expose Create New, Open/Import, recent presentations and real template/theme discovery. Recent items MUST be derived from persisted history; fabricated recent files are prohibited except for explicitly labelled onboarding or template content.
The release file contract MUST support native .9to1p plus PPTX and ODP import/export. Static output MUST support PDF and image export. Present MUST provide complete create -> edit -> save -> close -> reopen workflows with autosave, crash/interrupted-save recovery, revision tracking and conflict-safe persistence.
A failed save, partial media write, unresolved revision conflict or recovery failure MUST be surfaced as an explicit error state.
Present MUST NOT report success until the target revision and all referenced persisted objects required for the save have been committed.
Recovery MUST preserve the last known-good durable revision and MUST NOT overwrite it with a partially reconstructed presentation.
Canonical data model and identity
All persistent entities MUST use stable opaque IDs. Slide number, slide title, list position, object name and file path are mutable presentation attributes and MUST NOT be used as persistent identity.
Presentation {
  PresentationID: StableID
  SchemaVersion: Version
  RevisionID: RevisionID
  SlideOrder: SlideID[]
  ThemeRef: ThemeID + ThemeRevision
  MasterRefs: MasterID[]
  PresentationVariables: VariableMap
  ComponentTypes: ComponentTypeID[]
  ActionsGraphRef: GraphID + GraphRevision
  Settings: PresentationSettings
  Permissions: PermissionDescriptor
}
Slide {
  SlideID: StableID
  MasterID?: StableID
  LayoutID?: StableID
  ObjectOrder: ObjectID[]
  SlideVariables: VariableMap
  NotesID: StableID
  Hidden: boolean
  ActionsBindings: ActionBinding[]
  RevisionID: RevisionID
}
Reordering, renaming, hiding, duplicating or moving a slide MUST NOT mutate the identity of an existing SlideID. Duplicating a slide MUST allocate a new SlideID and new IDs for duplicated slide-owned objects while preserving references that are explicitly shared by definition.
A reference to a slide or object MUST resolve by stable ID. Position-based references such as 'slide 4' MAY be accepted as user input, but MUST be resolved to a stable ID before persistence or execution.
Required release defaults:
SpeakerWordsPerMinute = 130
IncludeHiddenSlidesInStatistics = true
LiveDrawingMode = OFF
LiveInkPersistence = SESSION_ONLY
IncludeSpeakerNotesInAudienceOutput = false
PersistSessionState = false
Changing a release default MUST create an explicit persisted setting override. Absence of an override means the release default above; implementations MUST NOT infer a different default from platform, file origin or prior session state.
Authoring shell and slide navigation
The editing shell MUST expose a persistent slide navigator, thumbnail view, slide sorter/grid view and searchable presentation outline. The same SlideID MUST back every representation of a slide.
Required slide operations:
Create, duplicate, delete/recover, reorder, hide/unhide and move slides between presentation sections.
Jump to slide by outline/search result, stable reference or user-visible position.
Multi-select slides for reorder, duplicate, delete, export and section assignment where the operation is semantically valid.
Preserve selection and focus predictably after slide mutations; deleting the active slide MUST move focus to a deterministic adjacent surviving slide.
The authoring shell MUST provide undo/redo, zoom, fit slide, fit selection, rulers, guides, grid, snapping controls and a status surface showing at least current slide/total slide count, zoom and relevant selection/document state. Keyboard-only navigation MUST cover the navigator, canvas, notes pane and inspectors.
Conventional object editing and layout
Present MUST provide mature slide-object editing for text, shapes, lines/connectors, images, shared tables/charts/graphs, drawings, media, code objects, 3D objects, Generative UI objects and supported embedded/shared objects.
Every spatial object type that declares geometric editing MUST support the applicable subset of:
Create, duplicate, delete, multi-select, group/ungroup and lock/unlock.
Move, resize, rotate, flip, z-order change, align and distribute.
Snap to grid/guides/objects and enter exact position, size and rotation values.
Crop or mask only for object types whose renderer declares crop/mask support.
Style copy/paste without silently copying object identity, runtime state or permissions.
Shape and text styling MUST persist actual stored values. Inspectors, toolbars and keyboard commands MUST read from and write to the same canonical object properties; a visible control that does not mutate the corresponding stored property is non-conformant.
Present MUST support object naming and a selection/object tree. The tree MUST expose stacking order, locked/hidden state and semantic object identity. Reordering the tree MUST change z-order only when the selected object type participates in z-order.
Themes, masters, layouts and templates
Present MUST support theme colours, theme fonts, backgrounds, reusable style tokens, slide masters, slide layouts, placeholders and reusable templates.
A slide linked to a layout MUST inherit layout/master properties unless that property has an explicit slide-level override.
Changing a master or layout MUST update linked slides without deleting valid slide-level overrides.
Reset Layout MUST remove only slide-level overrides governed by the selected layout; it MUST NOT delete unrelated slide-owned objects.
PPTX/ODP import MUST preserve representable master/layout relationships instead of flattening every slide to unrelated absolute objects.
Notes-page and handout layout data present in an imported format MUST be retained when the source construct maps to a declared Present capability. If no declared mapping exists, import MUST emit a CompatibilityIssue rather than silently dropping the construct.
Speaker notes and notes workflow
Every slide MUST have first-class speaker notes identified by a stable NotesID. Notes are authoring content associated with a SlideID and are not audience-slide content.
SpeakerNotes {
  NotesID: StableID
  SlideID: StableID
  Content: SharedRichTextDocument
  Locale?: LocaleID
  RevisionID: RevisionID
}
Notes MUST be editable in a dedicated notes pane and a full Notes view.
Notes MUST support shared rich-text editing, lists, links, proofing and supported shared embedded objects.
Notes MUST be searchable and addressable by typed APIs.
The shared Dictation capability MUST operate in speaker notes.
Notes MUST appear in Presenter View and notes-page print/export when explicitly selected.
Normal slideshow output, ordinary audience capture, PDF/image export and generated video MUST exclude speaker notes by default.
A notes-inclusive export MUST require an explicit notes output mode; it MUST NOT be inferred from the presence of notes.
PPTX/ODP import/export MUST preserve speaker notes when the destination format supports them. Loss or degradation MUST be listed in the compatibility report.
Word, character and speaking statistics
Present MUST provide live text statistics for presentation content. The statistics engine MUST expose the following explicit scopes: SELECTION, CURRENT_SLIDE, CURRENT_NOTES, ALL_SLIDES, ALL_NOTES and PRESENTATION_COMBINED.
PresentationTextStatistics {
  Scope: StatisticsScope
  WordCount: integer >= 0
  CharacterCountWithSpaces: integer >= 0
  CharacterCountWithoutSpaces: integer >= 0
  SlideTextWordCount?: integer >= 0
  NotesWordCount?: integer >= 0
  EstimatedSpeakingSeconds?: integer >= 0
}
Word boundaries MUST follow the platform Unicode word-segmentation implementation based on Unicode word-boundary rules. Character counts MUST count user-perceived Unicode grapheme clusters rather than UTF-16 code units. CharacterCountWithoutSpaces MUST exclude grapheme clusters classified by the platform Unicode implementation as whitespace.
Slide-text statistics include authored text visible in text-bearing slide objects and component labels in the selected scope.
Speaker-note statistics include only speaker-note rich-text content.
Comments, alt text, object names, Actions node labels, code source, hidden implementation metadata and compatibility metadata MUST NOT be included in ordinary word/character counts.
ALL_SLIDES MUST include hidden slides by default because they are part of the authored document; the statistics UI MUST provide an explicit Exclude hidden slides filter.
PRESENTATION_COMBINED MUST expose slide-text and notes counts separately in addition to the combined totals.
Estimated speaking time MUST be calculated from notes WordCount using SpeakerWordsPerMinute. The release default is 130 words/minute. The user MUST be able to change this value without altering the note text. EstimatedSpeakingSeconds = round(WordCount / SpeakerWordsPerMinute * 60).
Counts MUST update after a committed text edit without requiring a save/reopen cycle and MUST be accessible from normal authoring UI without inserting count text into the presentation.
Search, proofing, comments and collaboration
Present MUST provide presentation-wide search and replace across slide text and speaker notes. Every result MUST identify the SlideID, object/notes target and exact text range required to navigate to the match semantically.
Spell-check/proofing MUST operate on slide text and speaker notes and MUST preserve per-range language metadata.
Comments and replies MUST be anchorable to a SlideID, ObjectID and, where supported, a text range.
Realtime collaboration MUST preserve concurrent object, text, notes and comment edits using revision/conflict semantics; naive timestamp last-writer-wins data loss is prohibited.
Presence indicators and remote selections are session UI state and MUST NOT mutate presentation content.
Actions runtime and state model
Present MUST NOT implement an independent legacy animation engine or an independent transition runtime. All dynamic, timed, interactive and transition behaviour MUST be represented by a canonical typed Actions graph executed by the shared graph runtime.
ActionGraph {
  GraphID: StableID
  GraphRevision: RevisionID
  Nodes: ActionNode[]
  Edges: ActionEdge[]
  Entrypoints: ActionBinding[]
}
PresentationRuntimeState {
  GlobalVariables: VariableMap
  SlideVariables: Map<SlideID, VariableMap>
  ComponentState: Map<ComponentInstanceID, VariableMap>
  SessionState: VariableMap
}
Slides, objects, interactive components, media, code objects, 3D objects and live-drawing surfaces MUST expose versioned typed events. Event payloads MUST be schema-validated before graph execution.
The release event vocabulary MUST include at least:
PresentationStarted, PresentationEnded, SlideEntered, SlideLeft, NextSlideRequested and PreviousSlideRequested.
Clicked, DoubleClicked, PointerEntered, PointerLeft, Focused, Blurred and supported key/gesture events.
TimerElapsed and VariableChanged.
MediaStarted, MediaPaused, MediaPositionChanged, MediaEnded and MediaError.
ComponentValueChanged and ComponentSubmitted.
DrawingChanged and code-result/code-event output.
Actions MUST support conditions, branching, sequencing, parallel branches, delays/timers, reusable subgraphs and typed error paths. Actions MUST address targets by stable semantic IDs and MUST NOT simulate mouse/keyboard input when a typed capability exists.
Graph execution MUST be deterministic for the same graph revision, initial local state and deterministic inputs. When multiple nodes become runnable simultaneously, ordering MUST be defined by explicit dependencies/priority and a stable NodeID tie-breaker. External service results are recorded inputs and do not make the local scheduling order unspecified.
Cycles are permitted only when the runtime execution guard can bound them. Every event cascade MUST have a finite execution budget and loop detection. Exceeding the budget MUST terminate the affected cascade with a typed runtime error rather than freezing the presentation.
Starting a presentation creates a new PresentationSession with a defined initial state. SessionState and component runtime state reset on restart by default. Persistence requires an explicit author-configured persistence binding and the normal permission/write rules.
Transitions builder
The Transitions sidebar MUST remain available as a simple authoring surface, but it is a specialised Actions-graph editor. It MUST NOT invoke a second transition engine.
Choosing or editing a transition MUST create/update a marked Actions subgraph owned by that transition definition.
The sidebar MUST expose Open in Actions to reveal the exact generated subgraph.
Simple-editor changes MUST modify only nodes owned by the transition definition and MUST preserve user-authored extension nodes connected outside that owned region.
If an advanced graph edit makes the transition no longer representable by the simple sidebar, the sidebar MUST show a Custom/Advanced state rather than deleting or approximating the graph.
A transition completes only when its graph reaches the transition completion node. Slide navigation MUST commit exactly once per NavigationRequestID.
Interactive and reusable components
Present MUST ship first-class accessible Button, Switch, Text Input, Dropdown, Slider and Flashcard component types.
Components MUST expose typed properties, state, focus/keyboard semantics, accessibility role/name/value and versioned events.
Built-in hover, focus, pressed and value behaviour MUST work without requiring an author to construct a graph.
The same primitives MUST be exposed to authors through Actions; built-in components MUST NOT depend on a hidden private animation system.
ComponentType {
  ComponentTypeID: StableID
  DefinitionRevision: RevisionID
  VisualTree: ComponentNode[]
  PropertySchema: Schema
  StateSchema: Schema
  EventSchema: Schema
  ActionSchema: Schema
  DefaultValues: ValueMap
  Variants: Variant[]
  AccessibilitySemantics: AccessibilityDescriptor
  InternalActionsGraph: GraphID
  ExposedProperties: PropertyID[]
  ExposedEvents: EventTypeID[]
}
Users MUST be able to convert selected objects/components into a reusable Component Type. An instance MUST retain ComponentInstanceID, ComponentTypeID, ComponentDefinitionRevision, property overrides and instance state.
Linked instances MAY receive compatible definition updates only through an explicit update policy.
Detached/local copies MUST NOT receive future definition updates.
An incompatible component-definition update MUST NOT silently rewrite or invalidate an existing instance; it MUST require migration or retain the older definition revision.
Reusable component types MUST be storable in the user's/workspace component library.
Generative UI
Present's Insert surface MUST include Generative UI. The user may insert an existing generated UI artifact or request a new generated interactive surface through Dulche.
GenerativeUIObject {
  GenerativeUIObjectID: StableID
  SchemaRevision: RevisionID
  StateSchema: Schema
  EventSchema: Schema
  ActionsBindings: ActionBinding[]
  Permissions: PermissionDescriptor
}
Generated UI MUST execute in the approved shared CUI/Generative UI runtime.
Arbitrary raw HTML/JavaScript embedded directly into the presentation is prohibited.
Generated UI events MUST be connectable to the presentation Actions graph.
A generated UI object MAY be saved as a reusable Component Type only when its visual, state, event and action schemas use ComponentType-supported constructs and pass component validation.
Write, Present, Boards and Canvas MUST use the same canonical Generative UI representation rather than app-specific incompatible formats.
Runnable code, media, 3D and live ink
Runnable code:
A runnable-code object MUST store source, registered language/runtime ID, declared inputs, typed outputs, permissions and execution limits.
Execution MUST occur in a sandbox. Filesystem, network, account and device access are denied by default and may be granted only through declared platform capabilities.
CPU/time, memory and output limits MUST be enforced by the selected runtime provider. Limit violations MUST return typed errors.
Code results/events MUST be consumable by Actions and MAY update authorised presentation objects through typed APIs.
Audio and video:
Media objects MUST expose Play, Pause, Stop, Seek, SetVolume and SetPlaybackRate.
Media events MUST include Started, Paused, PositionChanged, Ended and Error.
Missing, offline or unsupported media MUST produce an explicit media error state; silent broken placeholders are prohibited.
Native 3D:
The initial supported interchange formats MUST include glTF and GLB.
3D objects MUST support transform, camera/orbit controls, camera presets, lighting/environment, material rendering, hotspots and Actions integration.
Model-intrinsic animation/timeline playback MUST be controlled through typed 3D Actions; it MUST NOT create a legacy presentation-animation subsystem.
Drawing/live ink:
Present MUST use the shared Rnote-derived structured drawing/ink model.
Live drawing modes are OFF, PRESENTER_ONLY and PARTICIPANTS where the collaboration surface supports participant input.
Live ink persistence modes are SESSION_ONLY, AUTO_SAVE and EXPLICIT_COMMIT.
DrawingChanged MUST be available to Actions and, when authorised, Dulche.
Slideshow runtime and Presenter View
PresentationSession {
  SessionID: StableID
  PresentationID: StableID
  SourceRevisionID: RevisionID
  ActiveSlideID: SlideID
  RuntimeState: PresentationRuntimeState
  RouteHistory: NavigationRecord[]
  StartedAt: Timestamp
  Status: RUNNING | PAUSED | ENDED | FAILED
}
Present MUST support full-screen and windowed slideshow playback and presenter/audience display selection when multiple display targets are available.
Presenter View MUST display current slide, next slide, speaker notes, slide navigator, elapsed timer, clock and presentation controls.
AudienceOutput and PresenterUI are separate render targets. Speaker notes, timers, controls, diagnostics and presenter-only overlays MUST NOT enter AudienceOutput unless the user explicitly selects a presenter-view recording/export mode.
The runtime MUST support keyboard navigation, slide jumping, hidden-slide rules, black/white blank screen, presenter pointer/laser, permitted live ink, live captions/subtitles where configured and interactive components/Actions.
Reduced-motion preference MUST be exposed to the Actions runtime. Motion-heavy Actions MUST provide a defined reduced-motion result rather than ignoring the preference.
Presenter notes MUST support presenter-side text sizing and auto-scroll/teleprompter behaviour without mutating stored note content.
A presentation session MUST execute against a defined SourceRevisionID. If the document changes during a live session, the runtime MUST either remain pinned to SourceRevisionID or apply an explicit safe live-update policy; it MUST NOT mix arbitrary object revisions silently.
Rehearsal, timings and recording
Present MUST support rehearsal of timings and structured session recording.
Rehearsal MUST record navigation and Action-path timing without converting the authored presentation into a fixed linear deck.
Recording MAY capture narration, camera, pointer/ink and the actual executed Action path subject to device permissions.
A recorded session MUST retain RouteHistory and timing data sufficient to replay or export the recorded route.
Replacing an existing recording MUST be reviewable and undoable; destructive replacement without a recoverable prior revision is prohibited.
AI-aware authoring and live presentation
The persistent AI bar MUST receive permission-filtered semantic context for all authorised slides, off-screen objects, speaker notes, Actions graphs, component definitions/state, media metadata, runnable code metadata, 3D objects, drawings and current presentation-session state. Semantic context MUST be preferred over screenshot/OCR interpretation.
Read-only AI mode MAY inspect, explain, summarise, rehearse and propose changes, but MUST NOT mutate the presentation or live runtime state.
Write AI mode MAY create/edit slides, notes, objects, components and Actions only through typed Present APIs and the normal permission, revision, undo and conflict semantics.
Requests such as branching on an audience answer, converting objects into a flashcard component or highlighting diagram regions on click MUST produce canonical typed graph/component mutations rather than UI automation.
AI-generated edits MUST be attributable to a revision/audit event and MUST be reversible through the normal revision/undo model.
Video, audio, podcast, print and static export
Present MUST generate Video, Audio and Podcast outputs from the canonical presentation model rather than from a detached textual summary.
Video rendering MUST execute the actual presentation runtime and timed Actions for a selected route.
Audio output MUST use presentation content and speaker/narration configuration without rendering slide visuals.
Podcast output MUST transform presentation content into a conversational treatment using selected Dulche Voice models/voices.
Generated narration/script and timeline MUST be previewable and editable before final rendering.
An interactive presentation may have multiple valid routes. Export MUST require one of RECORDED_SESSION, DEFAULT_ACTION_PATH or EXPLICIT_BRANCH_PATH. Present MUST NOT guess arbitrary button/quiz choices.
Static output MUST support full slides, selected slides, notes pages, outline text and configurable handout layouts with multiple slides per page where the target supports them.
PDF/image export MUST expose slide range, hidden-slide inclusion, background/transparency handling and notes inclusion.
Speaker notes are excluded from audience-facing static output by default.
Page size, orientation, margins and scaling MUST be explicit and previewable for print/handout output.
Import/export compatibility contract
Import/export MUST produce an explicit CompatibilityReport whenever a source or destination format cannot represent the complete native model.
CompatibilityIssue {
  IssueID: StableID
  Severity: INFO | WARNING | ERROR
  Direction: IMPORT | EXPORT
  FeatureType: string
  SourceTargetID?: StableID
  Description: string
  Resolution: TRANSLATED | DEGRADED | OMITTED | BLOCKED
}
Compatibility severity semantics:
INFO means the construct is translated without user-visible semantic loss; export/import may continue without acknowledgement.
WARNING means the construct is degraded or omitted but the operation can still produce a usable artifact; the issue MUST identify the exact affected source/target and resulting behaviour.
ERROR means continuing would violate the selected export/import policy, produce an invalid artifact or cause unaccepted destructive loss; the operation MUST block until the user changes the policy, removes the blocking feature or chooses a supported target.
TRANSLATED means the destination preserves the source semantics; DEGRADED means semantics remain usable but differ; OMITTED means the construct is absent from the result; BLOCKED means no result is committed.
PPTX/ODP legacy transitions and animations MUST be translated into Actions graphs when representable.
Present MUST NOT retain a hidden executable legacy animation engine solely for compatibility.
Unsupported or partially translated import behaviour MUST be listed in the CompatibilityReport.
PPTX/ODP export MUST compile the representable Actions subset into destination-native constructs.
Custom components, arbitrary stateful branching, runnable code, Generative UI, AI behaviours and richer interactive 3D logic that cannot be represented MUST be reported explicitly; silent disappearance is prohibited.
Import/export validation MUST cover slides, masters/layouts, text, speaker notes, media, supported charts/tables, links, accessibility metadata and representable Actions.
.9to1p is the authoritative full-fidelity format. A successful destination file creation is not sufficient evidence of compatibility.
Accessibility
Present MUST expose accessible semantics in both authoring and presentation runtimes.
Relevant visual objects MUST support alt text/description.
Slides MUST have an explicit reading order; interactive content MUST have an explicit focus order when reading order is insufficient.
Interactive components MUST expose accessible role, name, state/value and keyboard interaction.
Authoring and presenting MUST be operable without a pointer for required workflows.
Focus MUST be visible; required state MUST NOT be communicated only by colour.
Zoom/text scaling and reduced-motion behaviour MUST be supported.
An accessibility checker MUST identify at least missing required alt text, problematic reading/focus order and inaccessible interactive controls.
Accessibility metadata MUST round-trip through .9to1p and MUST be preserved in PPTX/ODP when the destination construct can represent it.
Security, permissions and external side effects
Present Actions, generated UI, runnable code, media, participant input and AI integrations MUST obey the platform permission broker and risk classification. A presentation MUST NOT gain arbitrary filesystem, network, account or device control merely because it is opened or presented.
Viewer interaction MUST NOT grant permissions that the presenting user/session does not already possess.
External side effects invoked from a slideshow MUST use the same confirmation, idempotency, audit and typed-error rules as the equivalent app/Automation action.
A denied permission MUST produce an explicit denied/error result that Actions can handle; the runtime MUST NOT silently substitute a weaker or different side effect.
Presentation content from untrusted sources MUST NOT be able to modify Home permissions or disable sandbox restrictions.
Typed Present API and mutation semantics
Present MUST expose versioned typed APIs sufficient for Spaces, Automations, Dulche and other authorised apps to inspect and mutate presentation state without UI simulation.
MutationRequest {
  BaseRevisionID: RevisionID
  OperationID: StableID
  ActorContext: PermissionFilteredActorContext
}
MutationResult {
  RevisionID: RevisionID
  ChangedIDs: StableID[]
  Warnings: Warning[]
  CompatibilityIssues: CompatibilityIssue[]
}
Mutation operations MUST reject a stale incompatible BaseRevisionID with REVISION_CONFLICT rather than silently overwriting newer edits. OperationID MUST support idempotent retry for operations declared retry-safe.
Required public capability groups:
Presentation/slide/object queries, including selection-safe semantic search.
CreateSlide, DuplicateSlide, MoveSlide, DeleteSlide and restore/recovery operations.
InsertObject, UpdateObject, DeleteObject and shared-object operations.
GetSpeakerNotes and SetSpeakerNotes.
GetStatistics with an explicit StatisticsScope.
Theme/master/layout read and mutation operations.
Actions.GetGraph, Actions.ValidateGraph and Actions.ApplyPatch.
Components.CreateType, Components.UpdateType and component-instance operations.
Media, 3D and drawing query/control operations.
StartPresentation, GetPresentationSession, NavigatePresentation, PausePresentation, ResumePresentation and EndPresentation.
Typed errors MUST distinguish at least NOT_FOUND, INVALID_ARGUMENT, PERMISSION_DENIED, REVISION_CONFLICT, UNSUPPORTED_FEATURE, RUNTIME_ERROR and CANCELLED. APIs MUST NOT collapse these states into a generic success=false result with no machine-readable reason.
Release acceptance criteria
Release conformance requires behaviour evidence. Source presence, UI screenshots or a successful build are insufficient on their own.
The release validation suite MUST demonstrate, at minimum:
Create -> edit -> save -> close -> reopen with slide/object identity, masters/layouts/themes and speaker notes preserved.
Live word/character statistics for selection, slide, notes and full-presentation scopes, including separate slide/notes totals and speaking-time calculation.
Mature conventional slide editing: multi-select, group, align/distribute, exact geometry, z-order, lock, crop/mask where applicable, guides/grid/snapping and object-tree operations.
A non-trivial Actions graph containing an event, condition, parallel/sequential work, state mutation and navigation.
A Transitions-sidebar edit that produces an Actions subgraph and survives Open in Actions plus a compatible round-trip back to the simple editor.
All required built-in interactive components and one reusable custom Component Type with revisioned linked instances.
A Generative UI object connected to Actions without raw HTML/JavaScript injection.
One sandboxed runnable-code example that emits a typed result and one denied-capability test.
Audio/video playback through typed controls and media events.
A supported glTF/GLB model with camera/hotspot Actions.
Structured live ink in at least SESSION_ONLY and EXPLICIT_COMMIT modes.
Presenter View with current/next slide, notes and timer while AudienceOutput remains free of presenter-only state.
Rehearsal/recording with recoverable RouteHistory.
PPTX/ODP import containing legacy transitions/animations with translated or explicitly reported results.
PPTX/ODP export with a CompatibilityReport for any non-representable native feature.
PDF/handout/notes-page export with explicit slide range and notes policy.
Keyboard-only authoring/presenting and accessibility-checker coverage.
AI Read-only versus Write enforcement and typed mutation auditability.
Crash/interrupted-save recovery and concurrent-edit/revision-conflict behaviour.
Cross-app shared-object clipboard fidelity for Present <-> Write, Present <-> Canvas and Present <-> Boards, using at least one shared text object and one non-text shared object supported by each tested endpoint.
Any acceptance case that fails by silently omitting data, silently degrading behaviour, bypassing typed APIs or exposing presenter-only/private state to the audience MUST block release conformance.
Canvas
Purpose, ownership and boundaries
9-1 Canvas is the handwriting, sketching, drawing and freeform spatial-authoring application in 9to1. Canvas owns Canvas artifacts, spatial composition, page/infinite-canvas geometry, drawing/ink editing, Canvas tool state, Canvas-specific view state and the Canvas domain API.
Canvas is not a Boards replacement and MUST NOT become a generic workspace/page system. Boards owns structured mixed-content workspaces and pages; Canvas owns freeform spatial drawing documents. Boards MAY host a live Canvas artifact, but the embedded Canvas remains owned by Canvas and retains its Canvas ArtifactID.
Canvas MUST use CUI for the visible application shell, menus, toolbars, inspectors, dialogs, launch screen and ordinary controls. A specialised accelerated drawing/rendering surface MAY exist as a CUI control for performance; .cui markup MUST NOT require each stroke sample to become an independent generic UI widget.
Donor and upstream contract
Rnote is the authoritative donor for mature handwriting, drawing, stroke, selection, rendering and applicable import/export behaviour. The implementation agent MUST obtain the latest appropriate stable Rnote source when the Canvas implementation pass begins, record the exact upstream repository, commit/release identifier and licence, and include the selected donor source in the Canvas source tree/build graph in accordance with the global Source & Donor Apps contract.
Canvas MUST maintain a donor-parity manifest generated from inspection of the selected Rnote revision. Every user-visible donor capability MUST be classified as PRESERVE, REPLACE_WITH_9TO1_NATIVE_EQUIVALENT or NOT_APPLICABLE. An unclassified donor feature is a release blocker, not permission to omit it.
PRESERVE means the donor behaviour, shortcuts, input semantics, quality-of-life behaviour and applicable data behaviour remain available through the 9to1 implementation.
REPLACE_WITH_9TO1_NATIVE_EQUIVALENT is used when 9to1 already owns the equivalent platform capability, including CUI shell/UI, Dulche AI, Home permission handling, Files storage integration or other shared 9to1 services.
NOT_APPLICABLE requires a concrete technical, legal or product-boundary reason and validation that its omission does not remove expected Canvas functionality.
Proprietary donor AI MUST NOT be copied. Any applicable AI-assisted behaviour is implemented through Dulche and the Canvas typed API.
Supported platforms and capability negotiation
Canvas MUST ship on every 9to1 platform for which the app is not explicitly exempt under the global platform/web rules. Desktop/native and web implementations MUST share the same Canvas artifact schema, stable identities, domain API semantics and server-side canonical entities.
Platform-specific input or rendering capability differences MUST be negotiated explicitly. Hardware capability absence MUST NOT be misrepresented as format incapability.
If pressure is unavailable, Canvas records and renders strokes using the declared non-pressure fallback without deleting pressure data already stored in the artifact.
If tilt, barrel buttons, palm rejection assistance or another device capability is unavailable, the UI MUST disable or omit only the dependent control and expose a capability-unavailable reason where the absence is user-relevant.
Opening an artifact on a lower-capability platform MUST preserve unsupported stored data for later use on a capable platform.
Canonical artifact model and identity
The native full-fidelity Canvas format is .9to1c. Persisted Canvas data MUST be schema-versioned. Readers MUST migrate, preserve or reject incompatible schema versions explicitly and MUST NOT guess the meaning of unknown fields.
CanvasArtifact {
  ArtifactID: StableID
  SchemaVersion: Version
  RevisionID: RevisionID
  DisplayName: string
  CanvasMode: INFINITE | PAGED
  PageOrder: PageID[]
  SharedResources: ResourceRef[]
  CollaborationMetadata: CollaborationState
  DocumentSettings: CanvasDocumentSettings
}
CanvasPage {
  PageID: StableID
  Bounds: InfiniteBounds | PageBounds
  Background: BackgroundDefinition
  LayerOrder: LayerID[]
  ObjectOrder: ObjectID[]
  RevisionID: RevisionID
}
CanvasObject {
  ObjectID: StableID
  ObjectTypeID: TypeID
  LayerID: LayerID
  Geometry: Geometry
  Transform: Transform
  Style: ObjectStyle
  Accessibility: AccessibilityMetadata
  SharedObjectRef?: SharedObjectReference
  RevisionID: RevisionID
}
InkStroke {
  StrokeID: StableID
  ToolDefinitionID: ToolDefinitionID
  Samples: StrokeSample[]
  ResolvedBrushProperties: BrushProperties
  Transform: Transform
  RevisionID: RevisionID
}
ArtifactID, PageID, LayerID, ObjectID and StrokeID MUST remain stable across rename, move, reorder, zoom, pan, style change and save/reopen. Display names, page positions, z-order and file paths MUST NOT be used as persistent identity.
Document mode and page-type model
Canvas MUST support both INFINITE and PAGED document modes as first-class modes selectable through the top-right quick-settings surface.
INFINITE mode provides a spatially unbounded working area for normal user workflows and MUST NOT expose an artificial page edge as document structure.
PAGED mode contains ordered PageID entities with explicit page size, orientation where applicable and page/background settings.
Page size, orientation, background and page ordering are document state and therefore collaborate, persist and travel with the artifact.
Changing between INFINITE and PAGED is a structural conversion, not a cosmetic toggle. The conversion workflow MUST preview the mapping of existing content, identify content that would cross/clash with generated page boundaries, and require explicit confirmation before committing a conversion that changes layout.
Conversion MUST be undoable/recoverable through document history and MUST NOT clip, discard or rasterise existing objects silently.
Persistence, autosave and recovery
Canvas persistence MUST be atomic at the smallest user-visible document mutation/revision boundary supported by the storage architecture. A partially written resource MUST NOT make the last known-good artifact revision unreadable.
Autosave MUST persist committed document mutations without requiring a manual Save command.
A save failure MUST surface an explicit unsaved/error state and retain recoverable local work.
Crash recovery MUST restore the last durable revision and recover newer journaled/temporary operations where available.
Imported source files MUST NOT be destructively overwritten merely because they were opened. Overwrite/export requires an explicit user operation appropriate to the source format.
Closing an artifact while durable persistence is unresolved MUST provide an explicit recovery choice rather than silently discarding changes.
Launch screen and document lifecycle
Canvas MUST implement the global launch-screen contract using real Files/storage state. Required launch capabilities are Create Blank, templates/starter canvases where supported, Recent, Favourites/Pinned, Shared with Me, search, Open and Import.
Create Blank MUST create a real Canvas artifact with a new ArtifactID and selected/default CanvasMode. Launch entries MUST NOT be mock cards.
Opening, renaming, moving, favouriting, sharing and deleting an entire Canvas artifact MUST integrate with Files' canonical artifact/storage semantics. Moving or renaming a file MUST NOT change ArtifactID.
Primary Canvas shell
The normal editing surface MUST prioritise the canvas and MUST NOT permanently reserve a ribbon, large left tool rail or large inspector panel for routine drawing.
Top-left document controls:
A compact ≡ pill opens the Canvas/application command surface for document/application commands assigned to it by the final CUI command model.
A neighbouring document-name pill displays the current DisplayName, for example Notebook 3, and provides document-level operations including rename, location/document information and applicable document collaboration/navigation commands.
Changing DisplayName MUST NOT change ArtifactID.
Bottom primary toolbar:
The canonical default order is Select, Pan, Pen, Eraser, Insert, Tools, AI. The toolbar is a floating horizontal CUI surface centred near the bottom of the primary canvas.
| Select | Pan | Pen | Eraser | Insert | Tools | AI |
The currently selected tool MUST display both its icon and human-readable name.
Non-selected tools MAY display icon-only in the compact state, but their names and primary shortcut MUST be exposed by hover and keyboard-focus tooltips.
The toolbar MUST remain usable with mouse, touch, stylus and keyboard navigation.
Responsive compaction MAY use controlled overflow or horizontal scrolling; tools MUST NOT silently disappear.
The active editing tool is document-session/editor state, not persisted canonical document content unless a specific tool setting is declared as a user preference.
Contextual tool-options host
When the active tool exposes contextual options, Canvas MUST render one secondary floating options surface immediately above the primary bottom toolbar. Tool implementations MUST declare their options through a common option schema rather than constructing unrelated private popup systems.
CanvasToolDefinition {
  ToolID: StableToolID
  DisplayName: string
  Icon: IconRef
  Shortcut?: Shortcut
  InputModes: InputMode[]
  Cursor: CursorDefinition
  OptionSchema?: ToolOptionSchema
  CapabilityRequirements: CapabilityID[]
  DomainActionMappings: ActionID[]
}
Selecting a tool activates it. Re-selecting the active tool MUST open/focus its deeper option surface when that tool has options. A long-press or context menu MAY expose secondary actions, but no required capability may exist only behind long-press.
Select and Pan
Select is the canonical object/stroke manipulation tool. It MUST support the applicable Rnote-derived selection modes plus shared-object selection semantics, including single selection, multi-selection and lasso/area selection where supported by the donor/object type.
Applicable selected content MUST support move, resize, rotate, duplicate, delete/recover, cut/copy/paste, group/ungroup, z-order/layer movement, alignment/distribution where meaningful and lock/unlock.
An operation unsupported by a selected object type MUST be disabled with a defined capability reason rather than appearing to succeed.
Pan is an explicit navigation tool. Pointer/stylus movement while Pan is active MUST navigate the viewport and MUST NOT create or modify drawing content.
Pen system and preset pens
Pen is the primary structured ink-authoring tool and MUST preserve applicable Rnote pen/brush behaviour. Pen options appear in the contextual tool-options surface above the bottom toolbar.
Canvas MUST ship with useful preset pens derived from the available drawing engines in the selected donor revision. Presets MUST cover the major donor-supported writing/drawing instrument classes that remain applicable, such as ordinary ink/ballpoint-style writing, fountain/variable-width ink, pencil and highlighter/marker behaviour where the donor supports them.
PenPreset {
  PenPresetID: StableID
  Name: string
  ToolEngineID: ToolEngineID
  TipOrNib: NibDefinition
  BaseWidth: Length
  PressureCurve?: Curve
  TiltResponse?: TiltDefinition
  Opacity: number
  Colour: Colour
  Smoothing: SmoothingDefinition
  Stabilisation: StabilisationDefinition
  EngineParameters: Map<string, TypedValue>
  Favourite: boolean
  RevisionID: RevisionID
}
The Pen menu MUST provide a Custom Pen workflow. Users MUST be able to create, preview, save, duplicate, rename, reorder, favourite, edit and delete/recover custom pen presets.
The custom-pen editor MUST expose only properties supported by the selected ToolEngineID.
Saving a pen preset MUST NOT retroactively alter existing strokes unexpectedly. Existing strokes retain resolved brush properties or an explicit versioned preset reference sufficient to reproduce their authored appearance.
Preset and custom pen selection MUST be keyboard and touch accessible.
Eraser
The Eraser tool MUST expose at least two user-facing modes in its contextual options:
Natural Eraser — drag over drawing content to erase according to the configured donor-supported erasure semantics, including partial/stroke behaviour where provided.
Quick Eraser — click/tap a target stroke or object to remove the complete resolved target immediately.
Quick Eraser deletion MUST use the same document history/domain delete operation as other Canvas deletion and therefore MUST remain undoable/recoverable. The target-resolution rule MUST be deterministic when objects overlap.
Insert catalogue and parity
Insert is the structured object insertion catalogue. Its first-level menu MUST use the following category order and each category opens a submenu to the right on desktop:
Text   >
Shapes >
Media  >
Table  >
Other  >
The first-level menu is category-only. Selecting/hovering a category MUST NOT insert a default object silently.
Text submenu:
Text Box — freely positioned shared rich-text object.
Heading — text object with a semantic heading role and heading defaults; it MUST NOT be implemented only as visually larger text.
Paragraph — text object with a semantic paragraph/body role and paragraph defaults.
Shapes submenu:
Opens the registered shared shape/line catalogue supported by Canvas, including applicable lines/connectors and shape families exposed by the Shared Productivity Engine.
Shapes MUST use the same canonical shared shape definitions and editing behaviour used by other 9to1 productivity surfaces rather than a reduced Canvas-only shape model.
Media submenu:
Image.
Audio.
Video.
Media objects MUST use the corresponding shared media representation and preserve editable metadata/behaviour rather than flattening to a thumbnail.
Table submenu:
Canvas MUST expose the shared table creation experience and the full Canvas-applicable shared table feature set.
Canvas MUST NOT implement a reduced Canvas-only table type. Table editing capabilities, structure and formatting come from the shared table engine; Canvas owns freeform placement/transform around the table.
Other submenu:
Other contains registered Canvas-compatible shared object types that do not warrant their own first-level category.
Graph MUST be available through Other using the canonical shared graph representation.
Other MAY include Link, File/Artifact, Embed, Equation, Code, Generative UI and additional registered shared types when the shared capability registry declares them Canvas-compatible.
Drawing MUST NOT appear as a separate Insert item because freeform pen/drawing is already a primary Canvas capability.
Insert catalogue parity has two mandatory dimensions:
Catalogue parity — every shared productivity object type declared Canvas-compatible by the shared capability registry MUST be reachable through Insert.
Behaviour parity — after insertion, the object MUST retain the shared object's complete applicable behaviour. Canvas MUST NOT replace a shared object with a feature-reduced Canvas-specific approximation.
InsertCategory {
  CategoryID: StableID
  DisplayName: string
  Icon: IconRef
  Order: integer
  Entries: InsertEntryID[]
}
InsertEntry {
  InsertEntryID: StableID
  ObjectTypeID: TypeID
  DisplayName: string
  Icon: IconRef
  CapabilityRequirements: CapabilityID[]
  CreateActionID: ActionID
}
The Insert UI MUST be generated from registered insertion capabilities plus the fixed category taxonomy above. Adding a registered shared object MUST NOT require a separate incompatible Canvas object implementation.
Desktop cascading menus MUST use conventional keyboard behaviour: Up/Down move, Right opens a submenu, Left returns, Enter/Space invokes and Escape closes the current menu level. Touch interaction MUST provide an explicit navigable submenu/back model and MUST NOT depend on hover.
Tools family
Tools is the home for specialised Canvas instruments that do not warrant permanent top-level toolbar slots. The exact list MUST be derived from the selected Rnote donor parity manifest and shared Canvas capabilities rather than an arbitrary hand-written subset.
Applicable geometry, line/arrow, ruler/measurement, fill/colour-picker, specialised selection and other donor tools MAY be organised here while retaining their donor behaviour. A tool moved into Tools is not optional merely because it is not a top-level button.
A future pin/favourite mechanism MAY allow users to promote specialised tools to the primary toolbar, but the default canonical toolbar remains Select, Pan, Pen, Eraser, Insert, Tools, AI.
Top-right quick-settings pill
A compact switch/settings pill MUST appear at the top-right of the Canvas editing surface. Activating it opens a dropdown for high-frequency document-level and editor-level settings. It is not a replacement for the complete Settings application.
Document-scoped quick settings MUST include:
Canvas/page type: INFINITE or PAGED.
Page size and orientation when PAGED.
Background colour/design, including registered ruled/grid/dot or other supported background patterns and their applicable spacing/design parameters.
Other document settings explicitly registered as quick-adjustable by Canvas.
Editor/user-scoped quick settings MUST include:
Smart Pen.
Snapping and guide/grid visibility where applicable.
Stylus/touch interaction preferences and exposed palm-rejection/gesture settings supported by the active platform.
Other registered non-document editor preferences appropriate to quick adjustment.
Document-scoped settings MUST persist with/collaborate through the artifact. Editor/user-scoped settings MUST persist as user/device preferences unless an individual setting explicitly declares document scope.
Smart Pen
Smart Pen is an editor setting that modifies new handwriting behaviour while enabled. Its purpose is to make freehand handwriting feel more controlled/snappy and visually neater without converting it into typed text.
Smart Pen MUST preserve handwriting as structured editable ink.
Smart Pen MUST NOT silently replace ink with text or discard original authored stroke semantics.
The adjustment algorithm MAY smooth geometry, regularise locally unstable stroke motion and make other constrained handwriting clean-up changes that preserve the user's intended writing rather than redrawing arbitrary content.
The resulting adjustment MUST be immediately undoable. The active undo/history window MUST retain enough pre-adjustment data to restore the user's original committed stroke.
Smart Pen state is an editor/user preference unless an explicit future document-scoped mode is specified.
Input, stylus and gesture contract
Input quality is a core Canvas requirement. Canvas MUST preserve applicable high-fidelity stylus information provided by the runtime, including pressure and tilt when available.
Pen/stylus drawing, touch navigation and mouse/trackpad interaction MUST be distinguishable so ordinary navigation does not create unintended ink.
Applicable eraser/barrel-button semantics from the selected donor must remain available.
Palm rejection MUST use platform/donor capabilities where available and MUST fail predictably when hardware/runtime support is absent.
Pan, zoom and rotate gestures MUST NOT mutate document content unless the active tool/action explicitly maps the gesture to a content mutation.
Stored pressure/tilt data MUST survive save/reopen and lower-capability viewing even if the current device cannot generate equivalent samples.
Layers, ordering and object manipulation
Canvas MUST preserve applicable Rnote layer functionality. Layers use stable LayerID identities and are document state.
Users MUST be able to create, rename, reorder, hide/show, lock/unlock and delete/recover layers where supported by the donor model.
Moving an object between layers changes LayerID membership without changing ObjectID.
Hidden/locked layers MUST obey the same selection/edit restrictions through UI and API.
Z-order within a layer and layer order are distinct concepts and MUST NOT be conflated by APIs or UI.
Shared Productivity Engine and cross-app object semantics
Canvas MUST use Home's Shared Productivity Engine for every shared object type it supports. Canvas owns spatial placement; the shared engine owns the shared object's semantic content/model.
Shared rich text, shapes, tables, media, graphs, equations, code, Generative UI and other registered shared objects MUST retain their shared schema when copied, embedded or referenced across supporting 9to1 apps.
The shared Rnote-derived ink model MUST allow structured ink to remain editable ink in Boards, Present, Write or Spaces where the destination declares ink support.
Unsupported destination/object combinations MUST fail explicitly or require an explicit user-selected flatten/export operation; silent rasterisation or semantic loss is prohibited.
Clipboard and drag/drop MUST carry a typed multi-representation payload containing stable/source references plus portable shared-object representations as applicable. The destination chooses the highest-fidelity compatible representation; it MUST NOT silently choose a lower-fidelity bitmap when a supported structured representation exists.
Files and Boards integration
Files is authoritative for storage/navigation semantics of Canvas artifacts. Canvas is authoritative for Canvas document semantics.
Boards MUST be able to host a live Canvas artifact/reference. A live Board embed references the same ArtifactID and canonical revision stream rather than creating an unmanaged duplicate.
Editing an authorised live Canvas embed in Boards edits the canonical Canvas artifact through Canvas domain operations.
Opening the same ArtifactID in Canvas and Boards MUST resolve to the same underlying artifact.
A snapshot/static copy is permitted only through an explicit user operation that clearly identifies the result as a copy/export rather than a live embed.
Dulche contextual AI
The bottom-toolbar AI item is the sole normal Canvas entry point for expanding the shared Dulche contextual AI bar. Canvas MUST NOT show a second permanently expanded AI bar while the bottom toolbar is present.
When AI is selected, the shared AI bar floats immediately above the bottom toolbar and the AI toolbar item becomes the selected tool. The bar contains the platform-standard AI access-mode controls, including Read-only and Write modes.
Selecting a different Canvas tool hides the expanded AI bar but MUST NOT automatically cancel an authorised active AI session. AI surface visibility and AI session lifecycle are distinct state.
CanvasAIState {
  SessionID?: StableID
  Lifecycle: NONE | IDLE | ACTIVE | WAITING_FOR_USER | COMPLETED | FAILED
  SurfaceVisibility: HIDDEN | EXPANDED
  IsAIToolSelected: boolean
}
IsAIToolSelected = true requires SurfaceVisibility = EXPANDED.
If SurfaceVisibility = HIDDEN and Lifecycle is ACTIVE or WAITING_FOR_USER, Canvas MUST show a compact sparkle session indicator immediately beside the top-right quick-settings pill.
Clicking the top-right sparkle indicator selects AI, restores the existing SessionID and expands the AI bar above the bottom toolbar. It MUST NOT create a duplicate session.
If a hidden session completes or fails, the indicator MUST enter a non-intrusive completed/error attention state until inspected/dismissed; it MUST NOT force the AI bar open or steal editing focus.
Dulche MUST receive permission-filtered semantic Canvas context including the active ArtifactID/PageID, stable object/stroke IDs, spatial relationships, text/shared-object semantics, current selection, document revision, current Canvas tool state where relevant and the Canvas actions allowed by the current AI access mode.
Read-only mode MAY inspect, search, reason, explain, navigate and propose changes but MUST NOT mutate the artifact or editor state.
Write mode MAY mutate Canvas only through typed Canvas/shared-object actions and the normal revision, permission, undo and conflict model.
A user reference such as 'these four boxes' MUST resolve to stable target IDs at request/execution binding time. Later selection changes MUST NOT silently retarget the running operation.
If targeted objects change incompatibly before an AI commit, the operation MUST return a revision/conflict result rather than blindly overwriting newer edits.
Handwriting recognition, OCR or AI-generated descriptions are derived metadata unless the user explicitly invokes a conversion that creates a new typed/text representation. Derived recognition MUST NOT silently replace canonical ink.
Spaces and Automations integration
Spaces MUST be able to open/reference an authorised Canvas artifact and edit it conversationally using 9to1.Canvas typed actions. Spaces MUST NOT use mouse/keyboard simulation when the equivalent Canvas action exists.
Automations MUST receive exhaustive Canvas UI/API parity subject to the same permissions and platform capabilities. Canvas MUST publish typed events for meaningful document changes and MUST NOT flood workflows with raw pointer-move events.
Minimum automatable event families:
Artifact opened/closed/saved/recovered.
Page created/deleted/reordered and document mode changed.
Object/stroke created/changed/deleted.
Layer created/changed/deleted/reordered.
Shared object inserted/changed/removed.
Collaboration/revision conflict and recovery state changes that are meaningful for automation.
Collaboration and conflict semantics
Canvas collaboration MUST operate on canonical structured document entities rather than exchanging flattened screenshots or whole-document last-write-wins blobs.
Concurrent edits to independent strokes/objects/pages SHOULD merge without destroying unrelated work.
Conflicting edits to the same canonical entity MUST be detected using revision/operation semantics and resolved deterministically or surfaced as a conflict.
Naive timestamp last-write-wins MUST NOT be the default conflict strategy.
Remote cursors, selections and transient viewport positions are collaboration presence/session state and MUST NOT alter canonical document content.
The implementation MAY use CRDTs, operation logs or another maintainable internal algorithm provided the observable collaboration, revision and recovery contract is satisfied.
Undo, redo and history
All ordinary Canvas document mutations initiated by UI, AI, Spaces or Automation MUST enter the same canonical history/revision system unless an operation explicitly declares non-document session state.
Undo/redo MUST operate on semantic user-visible operations, not arbitrary internal rendering steps.
AI/API mutations MUST be attributable in history/audit metadata.
Undoing deletion restores the same stable object/stroke identity where restoration semantics permit it.
Structural mode conversion, bulk manipulation and imported-content insertion MUST be represented as coherent reversible operations or explicit multi-operation transactions.
Import and export
The native .9to1c format is authoritative for full-fidelity Canvas behaviour. Canvas MUST retain all applicable Rnote import/export capabilities from the selected donor revision in addition to 9to1-native integrations.
Import/export MUST preserve supported structured content and MUST produce an explicit compatibility report when the source or destination cannot represent part of the native Canvas model.
Unsupported features MUST be classified as translated, degraded, omitted or blocked with the affected entity identified.
Silent loss of layers, stroke properties, page structure, shared objects, accessibility metadata or other canonical content is prohibited.
A successful file creation/open is not sufficient validation; representative round trips MUST compare semantic content.
Accessibility
Canvas MUST make ordinary authoring and document-management workflows operable by keyboard and assistive technology even though the primary document is spatial/visual.
All toolbar, menu, submenu, quick-settings, document-pill and AI controls require accessible names, roles, focus states and keyboard operation.
Meaningful Canvas objects MUST be inspectable through an accessible structured object/list view exposing object name/type, authored text, alt description and relevant ordering/spatial relationship information.
Visual objects MUST support alt text/description where appropriate.
Pure freehand ink is not required to become authoritative text automatically. AI/OCR descriptions MUST remain clearly derived metadata unless the user explicitly adopts/converts them.
Required state MUST NOT be communicated only by colour; focus must be visible; zoom/display scaling and reduced-motion preferences must be respected.
Security and permissions
Canvas inherits Home's permission broker and global API permission model. Canvas MUST declare action risk classifications and MUST NOT bypass Home for protected external or destructive operations.
Opening a Canvas file MUST NOT grant embedded code, Generative UI, media or linked artifacts arbitrary filesystem/network/account access.
Embedded/shared objects execute only within the permissions of their owning capability/runtime.
Untrusted imported Canvas content MUST NOT change Home trust grants, security policy or sandbox restrictions.
Whole-artifact permanent deletion is routed through Files' canonical deletion semantics; ordinary object/stroke deletion remains Canvas document history unless explicitly made permanent through an authorised action.
Typed Canvas API
Canvas MUST expose a versioned first-party API namespace with UI parity. The canonical namespace is 9to1.Canvas; language bindings that cannot use 9to1 literally use the global aliasing rule without changing canonical action names.
CanvasMutationRequest {
  BaseRevisionID: RevisionID
  OperationID: StableID
  ActorContext: PermissionFilteredActorContext
}
CanvasMutationResult {
  RevisionID: RevisionID
  ChangedIDs: StableID[]
  Warnings: Warning[]
}
Required action families include:
Artifact: Create, Open, Get, Rename, Save/Flush, Close, Recover, GetRevisionHistory, RestoreRevision and document-settings operations.
Pages: List, Get, Create, Duplicate, Move/Reorder, Delete/Restore, SetBounds/Size/Orientation and set page/background properties.
Layers: List, Create, Rename, Reorder, SetVisibility, SetLocked, MoveObjects, Delete/Restore.
Objects/Strokes: query/get, insert/create, update style, transform, duplicate, group/ungroup, reorder, move layer, delete/restore and semantic search.
Ink: begin/append/end stroke for authorised input/runtime integrations, create from structured samples, update allowed stroke properties and query stroke geometry/metadata.
Pens: ListPresets, CreatePreset, DuplicatePreset, UpdatePreset, Delete/RestorePreset and favourite/reorder operations.
Insert/shared objects: enumerate registered Canvas-compatible types and create each through its canonical shared-object action.
Import/export: enumerate formats/capabilities, start long-running import/export jobs, query status, cancel and retrieve CompatibilityReport.
AI/session integration: semantic-context queries and session binding/status operations; AI model execution remains owned by the shared Dulche platform.
Collaboration: presence/query, comments if Canvas exposes them, share/reference state and conflict/revision operations consistent with the owning collaboration service.
Actions that enumerate unbounded collections MUST paginate/stream. Long-running import/export/render work MUST return JobID, status and cancellation. Retry-safe mutations MUST use OperationID idempotency.
Typed errors MUST distinguish at least NOT_FOUND, INVALID_ARGUMENT, PERMISSION_DENIED, REVISION_CONFLICT, CAPABILITY_UNAVAILABLE, UNSUPPORTED_FEATURE, FORMAT_INCOMPATIBLE, IO_ERROR, RUNTIME_ERROR and CANCELLED.
Performance and resource constraints
Canvas MUST remain responsive for realistically large documents and MUST NOT render/process the entire spatial document every frame solely because it exists.
Viewport rendering MUST use spatial culling/virtualisation and appropriate caching so distant off-screen objects do not impose per-frame work proportional to total document size.
Incremental edits such as adding one stroke SHOULD avoid rewriting/re-rendering unrelated content where the persistence/rendering architecture can preserve correctness without doing so.
Caches MUST be bounded and invalidated by semantic revisions rather than growing without limit.
Large images/media MUST use progressive/appropriate decoding and MUST NOT block the interactive input loop unnecessarily.
The implementation test suite MUST include large-canvas fixtures with high stroke/object counts, embedded images/shared objects and widely separated spatial extents. Performance claims require measured runtime evidence on the declared supported-hardware baseline; 'feels fast' is not acceptance evidence.
Failure and recovery behaviour
If a shared object renderer fails, Canvas MUST preserve the object data and show a typed recoverable error representation rather than deleting or flattening it.
If a donor tool/backend capability fails to initialise, Canvas MUST report the unavailable capability and keep unaffected tools usable.
Transient save/sync failures MUST use bounded retry/backoff and expose unresolved state; infinite retries are prohibited.
If collaboration connectivity is lost, local permitted editing MAY continue when the storage/conflict model supports it, but unsynchronised state MUST be visible and reconciliation MUST use revision/conflict rules on reconnect.
If an import is partially parseable, Canvas MUST follow the declared import policy: either commit an explicitly reported partial result as a new artifact or fail atomically. It MUST NOT silently present a partial result as full-fidelity success.
Release acceptance criteria
Canvas is release-conformant only when behavioural evidence proves the complete agreed interaction model, donor parity and cross-app integration. Source presence, screenshots, disconnected controls or a successful build alone are insufficient.
The release validation suite MUST demonstrate at minimum:
Create an INFINITE artifact, draw/write with pressure-capable test input, pan/zoom, select/manipulate objects, save, close and reopen with stable IDs and stroke properties preserved.
Create a PAGED artifact, configure size/orientation/background, add/reorder pages and save/reopen.
Convert between document modes through the preview/confirmation workflow without silent clipping/loss and verify undo/recovery.
Bottom toolbar layout/order, selected-tool name, hover/focus tooltips and contextual options above the toolbar.
Preset Pen use plus create/edit/save/duplicate/reorder/delete/recover Custom Pen workflows.
Natural Eraser and Quick Eraser, including deterministic overlap targeting and undo.
Insert cascading menu with Text, Shapes, Media, Table and Other; verify Text Box/Heading/Paragraph, shape/line catalogue, Image/Audio/Video, shared Table and Graph under Other.
Verify Drawing is not exposed as a redundant Insert item.
Shared-object parity tests proving Canvas does not substitute reduced private Text/Shape/Media/Table/Graph implementations.
Top-right quick-settings pill with page type, background and Smart Pen plus correct document-vs-user persistence scope.
Smart Pen creates neater structured ink, does not convert to typed text and restores exact pre-adjustment content through undo.
AI selected -> shared floating Dulche bar appears above toolbar; changing tool hides the bar without cancelling an active session; active hidden session shows the top-right sparkle indicator; clicking that indicator restores the same SessionID.
Read-only AI is unable to mutate; Write AI performs a real typed edit and respects revision conflict if targets change.
Live Canvas embed in Boards edits the same ArtifactID, and an explicitly created snapshot produces a distinct copy.
Files rename/move does not change ArtifactID; Files delete/recovery semantics work for the whole artifact.
Spaces performs a semantic Canvas edit through the Canvas API without UI simulation.
Automation/API parity for representative page, layer, stroke, shared-object, pen, settings, import/export and recovery operations.
Cross-app clipboard fidelity for structured ink and at least two supported shared-object types with Boards plus at least one of Write/Present.
Concurrent editing on independent objects preserves both edits; conflicting same-entity edits produce deterministic merge/conflict behaviour rather than silent last-write-wins loss.
Keyboard-only operation of required shell/menu/tool workflows and assistive-technology inspection of meaningful Canvas objects.
Representative Rnote donor-parity suite against the pinned donor manifest, with every manifest entry evidenced or explicitly accepted as a scoped exception.
Native and web/open-on-lower-capability round trips preserve unsupported pressure/tilt and other stored data.
Crash/interrupted-save recovery from a last-known-good revision plus recoverable newer work.
Large-canvas stress fixtures demonstrate bounded memory/cache behaviour, viewport culling and acceptable measured pointer/pan/zoom responsiveness on the declared baseline.
Any acceptance path that silently drops user data, silently flattens a supported structured object, reports a disconnected UI control as working, creates duplicate canonical artifacts during live embedding, loses a running AI session solely because its UI is hidden, or omits an unreviewed donor feature MUST block release conformance.
Boards
Product role and donor contract
9-1 Boards is the flexible visual workspace, note-taking and project-composition app. AppFlowy is the primary donor for applicable workspace/page/database/block behaviours. Boards MUST preserve applicable AppFlowy features, quality-of-life behaviours and non-proprietary block types from the selected donor revision unless a scoped donor-parity exception is recorded.
AppFlowy proprietary AI, AppFlowy account/billing/subscription infrastructure and proprietary paid services are not copied. Only donor functionality available under legally usable source/licensing is eligible for direct source parity. Proprietary AI capabilities are replaced by 9-1/Dulche behaviour; unavailable proprietary services require a documented 9to1-native replacement or explicit non-applicability decision.
The implementation MUST maintain a donor-parity manifest for Boards identifying the selected AppFlowy revision and classifying each applicable user-visible feature/block as Preserve, Replace with 9to1-native equivalent or Not applicable. “Most AppFlowy features” MUST NOT be interpreted as permission to omit unreviewed donor functionality.
Visual shell
Boards MUST use native CUI and a clean, seamless workspace surface. Native Board pages MUST NOT render as a paper/card floating inside another background, and MUST NOT add a persistent page border, shadow or sheet frame around the editable content area. The page/workspace background fills the available content surface continuously.
The interface MAY take interaction/layout inspiration from mature workspace/note apps such as AppFlowy and Notion, but it MUST use 9to1/CUI design language rather than reproducing another product’s visual styling.
Landing page
Boards MUST implement the global launch-screen contract. Its landing page uses a board-centric card/grid composition: Create New is immediately available, recent boards are presented as visual cards with title/icon/preview metadata and last-modified state, and the left navigation/sidebar remains available so the user can move directly into an existing board.
The default landing view MUST expose Boards plus a Recent pages/components view. Templates and other discovery/idea surfaces MAY be added only when backed by real persisted/template data. The landing page MUST NOT fabricate recent/sample boards except explicitly labelled onboarding/template content.
Sidebar and board switching
The Boards sidebar MUST show the currently selected Board as a dedicated board switcher control above that Board’s page tree. The control contains at least the Board icon and name. Activating it opens the board picker, allowing the user to search/select another Board without leaving the Boards app or opening a separate management screen.
The sidebar page tree is scoped to ActiveBoardID and MUST support nested pages/subpages, selection, add page, rename, reorder/move and delete/recover according to the user’s permissions. Switching Board changes the page tree atomically to the selected Board and MUST NOT mix pages from multiple Boards in the active hierarchy.
ActiveBoardID and ActivePageID are client/window navigation state and are not Board identity. Board/Page identity MUST remain stable across rename, reorder and sidebar position changes.
Canonical Board and Page model
Board MUST contain at least BoardID, Name, Icon?, CreatedAt, ModifiedAt, owner/scope, ordered RootPageIDs, settings and revision metadata. BoardID is stable and MUST NOT derive from the Board name or Files path.
BoardPage MUST contain at least PageID, BoardID, ParentPageID?, PageType, Title, Icon?, SortKey, CreatedAt, ModifiedAt, permission metadata, revision and the type-specific content/reference payload. PageID is stable across move, nesting and rename.
In the release-candidate scope, PageType MUST support Native, Write, Canvas, Chat and ScopedChat. Source subpages belonging to Chat/ScopedChat are represented as explicit source entities/subpages under that chat page and are not silently interpreted as ordinary Native pages.
Native Board pages MUST store a versioned BlockTree, page-level DrawingLayer, layout settings and view settings. Write and Canvas pages reference/use their canonical shared-engine artifact model rather than flattening those app behaviours into Boards-specific copies. Chat/ScopedChat pages reference a persistent Agent/chat configuration plus their source collection.
Shared Productivity Engine
Boards MUST use Home’s Shared Productivity Engine. Shared blocks/objects use the same schemas, formatting semantics, renderer/editor and typed actions as their equivalents in Write, Present, Canvas and Spaces. A table, code block, graph, image, drawing or other shared object copied between supported surfaces MUST retain its shared representation rather than being rebuilt as a Boards-only object.
Boards MAY add Boards-specific container/layout metadata around a shared object, but MUST NOT fork the shared object payload itself. Cross-app copy/paste uses the versioned ProductivityObjectBundle contract owned by Home.
Edit and View modes
Every Board page surface MUST expose a persistent Edit/View switch in the top-right app/page chrome. Edit and View are authoring modes and are independent from the Locked/Unlocked layout mode defined below.
Edit mode permits mutations allowed by the user’s permissions and exposes authoring controls. View mode blocks document/page mutations while retaining navigation, selection/copy where permitted and explicitly view-safe interactive behaviour.
View mode MAY unlock runtime interactions that are intentionally non-authoring. For example, a Graph block can expose sliders so a viewer can vary values and inspect the resulting graph. Such interaction state is session-local by default and MUST NOT modify the stored document or default graph configuration unless an explicit authorised save action is invoked in Edit mode.
The persistent AI bar remains available in both modes. In View mode it is read-only with respect to Board/page content; an AI-requested mutation MUST require an authorised transition/action under Edit semantics rather than silently bypassing View mode.
Locked and Unlocked layout modes
Native Board pages MUST support a separate LayoutMode with values Locked and Unlocked. LayoutMode controls spatial placement behaviour only; it does not replace Edit/View permissions and it does not disable free drawing.
Locked mode preserves AppFlowy-style block-flow behaviour for flow blocks: blocks participate in the normal ordered document/block tree and are inserted/reordered using the donor-compatible flow layout. Existing absolute-position blocks remain visible at their saved coordinates but their free-position move/resize handles are disabled while Locked.
Unlocked mode retains normal flow editing and additionally permits blocks to be placed/repositioned freely anywhere on the page canvas. A freely positioned block receives Layout = Absolute with X, Y, Width, Height and ZOrder. A normal donor-flow block uses Layout = Flow.
Switching from Unlocked back to Locked MUST NOT snap, reflow, discard or convert Absolute blocks. Their exact stored coordinates and dimensions remain unchanged. Locked mode simply prevents casual spatial repositioning while continuing to allow the block’s content to be edited in Edit mode.
Unlocked drag/drop MAY convert a Flow block to Absolute only through an explicit spatial placement gesture. Converting an Absolute block back to Flow MUST be an explicit action because it changes document layout semantics.
Free drawing and ink
Native Board pages MUST support free drawing directly over the page canvas using the Home Shared Productivity Engine’s Rnote-derived drawing/ink implementation. Ink is stored in the page DrawingLayer using stable stroke/object IDs and MUST remain editable after save/restart.
Drawing MUST work in both Locked and Unlocked layout modes. Layout locking MUST NOT disable pen/eraser/ink editing. View mode remains non-authoring and therefore MUST NOT create/erase strokes.
Drawing coordinates MUST remain anchored to the page/canvas coordinate system so strokes do not drift when surrounding Flow blocks are edited. Where ink is attached/anchored to a specific object, that relationship MUST be explicit in the drawing object rather than inferred from screen pixels.
Floating contextual formatting island
Boards MUST expose a persistent floating contextual tool island near the top of the content surface while in Edit mode. It is app chrome, not document content. Common authoring/formatting controls MUST be directly reachable from this island rather than requiring the block insertion (+) menu.
The island adapts to the active block/object/selection. For text it exposes the applicable style/heading, emphasis, text/paragraph formatting and related controls; for tables, images, drawings and graphs it exposes the relevant object-specific controls. Multi-selection exposes only actions valid for the current common selection.
When no editable object is selected, the island MAY show page-level/default insertion/layout controls. The + menu remains an insertion/discovery surface; it MUST NOT be the sole location for routine formatting of the currently selected content.
In drawing mode the island MUST expose the active Rnote-derived pen/eraser/ink controls. In View mode authoring controls are removed or replaced by view-safe controls while the Edit/View switch remains reachable.
Persistent AI bar
Boards MUST implement the global persistent bottom AI bar. Its semantic context MUST include the active Board, active Page, selected block/object IDs, Edit/View state, LayoutMode and the user-authorised Board/Den context relevant to the request.
AI mutations MUST use 9to1.Boards.* or the owning embedded artifact APIs. Proprietary AppFlowy AI actions MUST NOT be invoked or emulated through hidden donor services. Dulche is the AI runtime and Home remains the shared permission/context broker.
Block system and AppFlowy block parity
Boards MUST include every non-proprietary-AI AppFlowy block type available in the selected legally usable donor revision, with its applicable editing behaviour and quality-of-life interactions, unless the donor-parity manifest records a concrete exception. The implementation MUST NOT maintain a manually shortened hard-coded parity list that silently falls behind the selected donor source.
Boards additionally MUST support built-in Heading 4, Heading 5 and Heading 6 block/text styles, in addition to the donor-compatible heading levels, and MUST support user-defined named header and paragraph styles. Custom styles MUST be stored as versioned style definitions referenced by stable StyleID so renaming a style does not detach existing blocks.
A custom text style definition MUST be capable of specifying the applicable shared text properties including font family/reference, size, weight, emphasis, foreground/background/highlight, paragraph spacing, line spacing, alignment and other supported shared-engine text attributes. Unsupported properties MUST be preserved during cross-app round-tripping.
New shared object/block types registered in Home’s Shared Productivity Engine MUST become available to Boards through the common registry whenever Boards declares support for that type. Boards-specific wrappers MAY supply page/layout controls, but duplicate object engines are non-conformant.
Graph block
Boards MUST provide a shared-engine Graph block for mathematical/analytical graphing. A Graph block MUST support multiple simultaneous expressions/series, independently styled plots, points/markers, labelled axes, configurable viewport/domain/range and shaded regions/inequalities.
GraphBlock data MUST include stable GraphID, ordered plot/expression definitions, variables, optional slider definitions, viewport/axes settings and style metadata. Multiple expressions MUST coexist in one graph without being flattened into a rendered image.
A slider definition MUST include VariableID/name, minimum, maximum, step and default value. In Edit mode the author configures slider bounds/defaults. In View mode viewers MAY manipulate enabled sliders; temporary slider values are per-view session unless explicitly saved as new defaults by an authorised Edit action.
Graph blocks MUST support shared-engine copy/paste and remain editable after transfer to another participating surface that declares Graph support. Exporting to static image is a separate explicit operation.
Enhanced image formatting
Image objects in Boards MUST support, at minimum, resize with aspect-ratio control, crop, rotate, fit/fill behaviour, alignment/positioning, caption, alt text/accessibility description and link/reference metadata. Non-destructive image transforms MUST preserve the source asset until the user explicitly exports/rasterises a transformed copy.
Enhanced table formatting
Table objects MUST support add/remove/reorder rows and columns, row/column resize, merge/split where structurally valid, horizontal/vertical cell alignment, text formatting, cell background/fill, borders, header row/column styling and table width/alignment controls. Formatting MUST remain separate from the cell data/value payload so copy/paste and automation can manipulate either deterministically.
Cross-app parity blocks
Boards MUST expose shared-engine blocks/objects that have equivalents in the other productivity surfaces instead of creating incompatible lookalikes. Required cross-app object families include rich text, tables, code, equations, images/media, ink/drawings and Graph. Additional shared-engine object types become eligible through the common registry.
App-specific artifacts MAY be embedded as canonical artifact references. An embedded mutable artifact MUST retain its owning app identity/capabilities and MUST NOT be flattened to a screenshot/static copy except through an explicit static export action.
Write and Canvas page types
Add Page MUST offer Write and Canvas as first-class PageType options alongside Native. Creating a Write page creates/attaches the canonical Write document model inside that Board page and presents Write editing behaviour within the Boards shell. Creating a Canvas page does the equivalent for Canvas.
Write/Canvas Board pages MUST use the same Home Shared Productivity Engine and underlying artifact behaviour as the standalone apps, not a visually similar Boards reimplementation. The Board page is a container/reference to the canonical artifact; edits made inside Boards and edits made through the standalone owning app or Spaces MUST resolve to the same artifact/revision history.
Opening a Write/Canvas page inside Boards MUST NOT launch a second external app window merely to obtain basic editing behaviour. Shared engine capabilities are hosted through Home and rendered in the Boards page surface.
Chat page type
Chat is a first-class Board PageType backed by a persistent 9-1 Agent executed through Dulche. The Agent automatically receives permission-filtered semantic knowledge of the containing Board and its authorised pages/items. It MAY also use the user’s connected apps/integrations and relevant persistent context registered in Dulche Den when the Agent/tool permissions permit those actions.
Chat MUST use typed 9to1 app/integration actions for consequential work. Board membership or Chat context MUST NOT grant implicit access to an external app, tool or Den namespace that the caller/Agent is not otherwise authorised to use.
The Chat page stores a stable AgentID/definition revision plus ChatSession/Conversation references independently from the visual page title. Renaming/moving the page MUST NOT create a new Agent or lose history.
Scoped Chat page type
Scoped Chat is a closed-corpus notebook-style Chat PageType. Its answers MUST be grounded only in the authorised contents of the containing Board plus the explicit source collection attached to that Scoped Chat. It MUST NOT search the public web, invoke external-information retrieval tools or consult unrelated connected-app content to fill evidence gaps.
When the permitted corpus does not contain enough information to support an answer, Scoped Chat MUST report that the available sources do not support the requested point rather than silently answering from general model knowledge. Transformation/reasoning over supplied material remains allowed.
Scoped Chat responses MUST expose source provenance at the Board page/source-object level so the user can navigate back to the material supporting the response.
Chat source subpages
Chat and Scoped Chat MUST support additional source subpages beneath the Chat page. Uploaded source files become stable Source entities with SourceID, display name, source type, content/artifact reference, ingestion/index status, hash/revision metadata and permission state.
Source ingestion MUST be asynchronous/observable for large files and MUST distinguish Pending, Ready, Failed and Removed states. Failed ingestion MUST NOT make the source appear successfully available to the Agent.
For ordinary Chat, uploaded sources supplement Board/authorised connected context. For Scoped Chat, the Board plus explicit source collection defines the maximum information corpus. Removing/revoking a source prevents future reads while preserving audit/history semantics required by Dulche Den.
Data-backed structured items
Boards does not create a second private database engine. Where the AppFlowy donor exposes database-like blocks, records or views, Boards MUST implement the applicable user-facing behaviour by hosting or referencing canonical 9to1 Data artifacts/views through the Shared Productivity Engine and typed Data APIs. A Board item may therefore display and interact with a Data table/range/view while the underlying rows, fields, formulas, permissions and revisions remain owned by Data.
Donor parity still applies to the Boards-facing workflow: applicable filtering, sorting, grouping, view selection, record presentation and related quality-of-life behaviour MUST either map to supported Data capabilities or be recorded as a concrete donor-parity exception. Boards MUST NOT silently fork Data state into an incompatible local database merely to imitate donor UI.
Board document-space coordinates
Persisted Native-page spatial placement MUST use Board document-space coordinates, not CUI's -1000…1000 proportional screen coordinate system. The page content origin is (0,0); X increases to the right and Y increases downward. X, Y, Width and Height MAY be decimal document-space values and MAY extend outside the initial viewport where the page supports panning/free placement.
Zoom, DPI scaling, window resizing and panning are view transforms only and MUST NOT rewrite persisted Board coordinates. Absolute blocks and free ink use the same stable document-space basis where applicable so objects/strokes do not drift relative to each other. Conversion into CUI/layout coordinates occurs only at render/input boundaries.
Embedded artifact ownership and lifecycle
Every mutable embedded/hosted app artifact MUST carry explicit ownership semantics independent from its BoardPage reference. At minimum, Boards distinguishes BoardOwned artifacts created as part of that Board page from Referenced artifacts that are independently owned elsewhere. Attaching an existing Write/Canvas/Data/etc. artifact creates a reference and MUST NOT transfer ownership merely because it appears inside Boards.
Deleting or recovering a page follows the referenced artifact's ownership contract. Recoverable deletion of a BoardOwned artifact remains recoverable with its owning page/Board. Permanent purge MAY cascade to BoardOwned artifacts only through an explicit destructive operation whose impact preview names the affected artifacts. Referenced artifacts MUST NOT be deleted by deleting the Board/page. Move, rename, nesting and Board switching never change artifact identity or ownership.
Collaboration and concurrency
Boards collaboration MUST resolve concurrent work at the narrowest stable entity possible. Independent block/object edits and independent ink strokes SHOULD merge without forcing a whole-page conflict. Page-tree operations MUST use deterministic stable ordering/parent semantics so simultaneous moves/inserts do not silently reorder unrelated pages.
Concurrent incompatible edits to the same canonical block/object/artifact MUST surface the owning object's merge/conflict behaviour rather than blind last-write-wins. Presence, remote cursors, selections and transient viewport state are ephemeral collaboration state and MUST NOT be written into canonical Board content. Reconnect/offline replay MUST preserve operation identity so retries cannot duplicate mutations.
Platform capability behaviour
Boards MUST ship useful supported native behaviour on Windows and 9to1-OS and a useful web version under the global web-product contract. All clients operate on the same Board/Page/artifact identities and canonical revisions. Platform capability differences MUST be explicit and queryable rather than silently dropping features.
Browser/native differences may include pen pressure/tilt, OS file drag-and-drop, clipboard richness, filesystem access, windowing and availability of specialised embedded surfaces. When a capability is unavailable, Boards MUST provide the closest useful supported interaction or a clear unsupported-capability state without corrupting or flattening the underlying artifact.
Performance and resource behaviour
Large Boards MUST use incremental/lazy loading and virtualisation. Opening a Board MUST NOT eagerly instantiate every nested page, every off-screen block, every source document or every embedded app surface. Large block lists, Data-backed views and page trees SHOULD virtualise off-screen content while preserving correct selection, search, keyboard navigation and accessibility semantics.
Drawing rendering MUST cull/incrementally render off-screen strokes; previews and embedded-surface caches MUST be bounded and revision-invalidated; Board/search/source indexing MUST update incrementally; and expensive embedded artifacts SHOULD hydrate on demand. Performance acceptance MUST include representative large-Board, large-page, drawing-heavy and collaboration scenarios on the declared supported-platform baseline.
Persistence, history and recovery
Board/page/block edits MUST use revisioned, crash-safe persistence through the owning storage layer. A process/app crash MUST NOT corrupt the entire Board because one page/block write was interrupted. Recovery MUST identify the affected Board/Page and restore the latest consistent revision or surface a structured conflict/recovery state.
Delete semantics for Boards and Pages MUST be recoverable by default unless an explicit permanent-delete/purge action is invoked under the applicable high-risk permission flow. Deleting a Board container MUST NOT silently permanently delete separately owned embedded artifacts without explicit cascade semantics and user-visible impact.
Concurrent edits MUST use revision/conflict semantics rather than blind last-write-wins when the same canonical object is changed by multiple clients/Spaces/Automations.
Boards API
9to1.Boards.ListBoards();
9to1.Boards.GetBoard(boardID);
9to1.Boards.CreateBoard(config);
9to1.Boards.UpdateBoard(boardID, patch);
9to1.Boards.DeleteBoard(boardID);
9to1.Boards.RestoreBoard(boardID);
9to1.Boards.SetActiveBoard(boardID);
9to1.Boards.ListPages(boardID);
9to1.Boards.GetPage(pageID);
9to1.Boards.CreatePage(boardID, pageType, parentPageID?, position?);
9to1.Boards.MovePage(pageID, parentPageID?, position);
9to1.Boards.UpdatePage(pageID, patch);
9to1.Boards.DeletePage(pageID);
9to1.Boards.RestorePage(pageID);
9to1.Boards.SetEditMode(pageID, Edit | View);
9to1.Boards.SetLayoutMode(pageID, Locked | Unlocked);
9to1.Boards.Block.List(pageID);
9to1.Boards.Block.Insert(pageID, block, location);
9to1.Boards.Block.Update(blockID, patch);
9to1.Boards.Block.Move(blockID, location);
9to1.Boards.Block.SetLayout(blockID, Flow | Absolute, layout?);
9to1.Boards.Block.Delete(blockID);
9to1.Boards.Drawing.AddStroke(pageID, stroke);
9to1.Boards.Drawing.UpdateStroke(strokeID, patch);
9to1.Boards.Drawing.DeleteStroke(strokeID);
9to1.Boards.Graph.Create(pageID, graph);
9to1.Boards.Graph.Update(graphID, patch);
9to1.Boards.Graph.SetViewVariable(graphID, variableID, value);
9to1.Boards.Chat.Send(pageID, prompt);
9to1.Boards.Chat.ListSources(pageID);
9to1.Boards.Chat.AddSource(pageID, source);
9to1.Boards.Chat.RemoveSource(pageID, sourceID);
These are minimum canonical entry points, not the exhaustive catalogue. Every additional user-visible Boards operation — including donor-parity actions and contextual-island controls — MUST have an equivalent supported API/domain action under the global API-parity rule. APIs MUST use stable IDs, revision checks where required and structured partial/error results.
Permissions and risk
Read, edit, share/admin, external-action and destructive permissions MUST remain distinct. View mode does not grant edit permission, and Edit mode cannot override an account/object ACL. Chat/AI/tool actions inherit the effective caller/Agent permissions and the global Home permission broker.
Permanent Board/Page purge, destructive bulk actions, permission/share changes and consequential external actions initiated from Chat/AI MUST use the elevated-risk approval rules defined globally. Ordinary text/block edits use normal edit scope but remain audited where performed by automation/AI.
Failure behaviour
Boards MUST return structured failures for BoardNotFound, PageNotFound, BlockNotFound, UnsupportedPageType, UnsupportedBlockType, InvalidLayoutTransition, RevisionConflict, PermissionDenied, SourceIngestionFailed, ScopedChatExternalAccessDenied, DependencyUnavailable and SharedEngineIncompatible, plus the global error contract.
If Home or the Shared Productivity Engine becomes unavailable after Boards has opened, Boards MUST stop new unsafe mutations, preserve already loaded unsaved state for recovery where possible and surface a repair/reconnect state. It MUST NOT silently switch to an incompatible private document engine.
Acceptance requirements
Boards is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
The landing page, Board switcher and nested page sidebar operate on persisted Boards/Pages and survive restart.
Applicable AppFlowy donor features/block types are accounted for by the donor-parity manifest and tested against the selected donor revision.
Native pages render on a seamless background with no page-card/sheet frame.
Locked mode preserves AppFlowy-style flow behaviour; Unlocked mode supports arbitrary block placement; relocking preserves absolute coordinates.
Rnote-derived drawing works in both Locked and Unlocked layout modes and survives save/restart.
The floating top contextual island adapts across text, image, table, drawing and graph selections.
Edit/View switching blocks authoring in View while graph sliders remain usable as non-persistent interactions.
H1-H6 and named custom header/paragraph styles persist and round-trip.
Graph blocks render multiple simultaneous plots, shaded regions and interactive slider variables without flattening.
Enhanced image/table formatting persists and remains script/API-addressable.
A shared object copied Boards → Write/Present/Canvas/Spaces and back retains equivalent shared schema/formatting.
Write and Canvas PageTypes edit the same canonical artifact behaviour as their standalone surfaces.
Chat can reason over Board context and use only authorised Den/app capabilities.
Scoped Chat cannot search/use external information and reports insufficient source evidence when its Board/source corpus does not support an answer.
Uploaded Chat source subpages expose correct ingestion state and become/revoke usable context deterministically.
AI bar mutations use typed actions and cannot mutate Board content in View mode without authorised Edit semantics.
Crash/restart and revision-conflict tests preserve Board/Page integrity without silent last-write-wins data loss.
AppFlowy database-like Board items use canonical Data-backed state rather than a second Boards-only database engine.
Absolute blocks and ink retain stable Board document-space coordinates across zoom, pan, DPI/window changes and restart.
BoardOwned versus Referenced embedded-artifact deletion/recovery semantics are enforced without accidental cascade deletion.
Concurrent independent block/ink/page operations merge deterministically while same-object conflicts never fall back to silent last-write-wins.
Windows, 9to1-OS and web clients capability-negotiate declared differences while preserving the same canonical Board/Page/artifact identities.
Representative large Boards/pages/Data views/drawing workloads remain responsive through lazy loading, virtualisation, incremental rendering/indexing and bounded caches.
When Home is absent at process start, Boards refuses normal launch and enters the required Install Home bootstrap flow.
Planner
Product role and boundary
9-1 Planner is the CUI calendar, schedule, countdown and assignment-planning app. It answers when something happens, when something is due, what the user needs to do, and which canonical 9to1 entities are connected to that plan. Planner is not Home Events, which is an ecosystem activity/history timeline; it is not Spaces Tasks, which represent goal-oriented agentic work/runs; and it is not Automations, which own recurring/event/condition-triggered execution.
Planner MUST expose local/native planning and provider-backed calendar/task data through one coherent typed model without duplicating canonical external or 9to1 entities. References to routes, Mail, Files, Write, Present, Boards, Canvas, Data, Spaces, Automations and other supported entities retain the owning entity's stable identity.
Donor and upstream contract
Planner is a first-party CUI surface. No external application donor is currently normative for Planner. Implementers MUST NOT silently choose a donor and allow donor-specific storage or behaviour to become public Planner authority. Mature calendar standards, provider APIs and the shared 9to1 frameworks MAY be used as implementation references where they do not contradict this specification.
Primary views and navigation
Planner MUST provide Today, Day, Week, Month, Agenda and Tasks views. The main calendar views use conventional direct manipulation: selecting a time range can create an item, timed items can be moved/resized where permitted, all-day items have a dedicated region, overlapping items remain legible, the current-time indicator is visible where relevant, and keyboard navigation can move through dates/items without requiring pointer input.
The sidebar MUST expose the user's calendars/task lists plus three optional modules — Schedule, Countdown and Assignments. Each optional module can be enabled, hidden and reordered by the user. Hiding a module removes its navigation surface only; it MUST NOT delete its data.
Agenda
Agenda is Planner's chronological list of upcoming planning items rather than a time-grid view. It MUST group and order upcoming events and other relevant due/scheduled Planner entities by date/time while preserving each item's canonical identity.
Agenda SHOULD surface at least events, scheduled PlannerTasks and Assignment deadlines. It MAY surface other Planner milestones such as selected Countdowns when the user has enabled that integration. Filters can narrow the list by calendar/list, completion/status, category and other applicable typed fields.
Canonical entity model
Planner's canonical entity families are:
Calendar — organisation/source container for events, with stable CalendarID, display metadata, ownership/provider binding, capability state and revision metadata.
PlannerEvent — a time-bounded or all-day event with stable EventID.
PlannerTask — a personal planning/to-do item with stable PlannerTaskID; this is distinct from Spaces/Dulche TaskID.
Reminder — a notification rule/state attached to an Event, PlannerTask, Assignment, Countdown or other supported Planner entity.
RecurrenceDefinition and recurrence exceptions — a versioned repeating-series contract.
Schedule and ScheduleItem — optional structured day-plan entities.
Countdown — optional user-defined target-date/time entity.
Assignment and AssignmentItem — optional structured deadline/work-completion entities.
Display names, sidebar order and current view state are not identities. Stable IDs survive rename, move, reorder, view changes and provider resynchronisation where the provider preserves identity.
PlannerEvent
PlannerEvent MUST contain at least EventID, CalendarID, Title, Description?, Start/End or all-day date span, TimeZone semantics, Location?, Recurrence?, References[], Reminders[], Status, CreatedAt, ModifiedAt, owner/scope, source/provider metadata and revision. Provider-backed events additionally retain the provider's stable event identity/version token where available.
An Event may reference a meeting, Maps route, Files/Write/Present/Board/Canvas/Data artifact, Mail thread/message, Space, Automation output or other registered 9to1 entity. Referencing an entity MUST NOT duplicate its canonical payload.
PlannerTask
PlannerTask MUST contain at least PlannerTaskID, Title, Description?, Status, TaskListID?, DueAt/date?, ScheduledStart?, ScheduledEnd?, Recurrence?, Priority?, References[], Reminders[], CreatedAt, ModifiedAt, owner/scope and revision.
A PlannerTask can be due without being scheduled. Scheduling a PlannerTask onto the calendar assigns ScheduledStart/ScheduledEnd to the same PlannerTaskID; Planner MUST NOT manufacture a duplicate Event merely to render the task in a time-grid.
Dragging an unscheduled task onto a calendar schedules it. Removing it from the time-grid may clear the scheduled window without deleting the task or its due date. Completing/reopening the task preserves its identity/history.
Time zones, all-day values and daylight saving
Timed Event/Task values MUST use real timezone-aware semantics. Planner distinguishes the authoritative event timezone, absolute instant(s), viewer timezone and an explicitly supported floating/local-time representation. A user travelling or changing device timezone MUST NOT silently change the intended meaning of the event.
All-day items are date-based and MUST NOT drift onto an adjacent date through UTC conversion. Recurrence across daylight-saving transitions uses timezone database rules rather than fixed UTC offsets.
Recurrence and occurrence identity
Recurring Events, PlannerTasks, Assignments and Countdowns MUST use a recurrence definition rather than pre-creating an unbounded list of copies. Supported recurrence semantics include the normal daily/weekly/monthly/yearly interval patterns, selected weekdays, end date and occurrence count where applicable.
Each expanded occurrence has stable occurrence identity derived from its series plus occurrence key/date-time. Editing a repeating item MUST support the applicable scopes This occurrence, This and following, and Entire series. A modified/skipped occurrence is stored as an exception; modifying one occurrence MUST NOT flatten the entire series into unrelated records.
The runtime expands only the requested/visible/query interval plus bounded prefetch. Infinite recurrence MUST never be materialised eagerly.
Reminders and Home notifications
Planner reminder delivery uses Home's shared notification service rather than a private Planner notification runtime. An entity MAY own multiple reminder rules such as at start, relative minutes/hours/days before, or a custom trigger supported by the reminder contract.
Reminder runtime state distinguishes at least Scheduled, Fired, Snoozed and Dismissed. Snoozing a reminder changes reminder state/next notification time and MUST NOT rewrite the Event/Task/Assignment's actual start or due time. Recurring-series reminders are evaluated per occurrence.
Optional sidebar module: Schedule
Schedule lets the user break a day or other bounded period into ordered timed ScheduleItems and inspect live progress through the current item/day. Example uses include a college day split into individual lessons, breaks and study periods.
Schedule MUST show, at minimum, current item start/end, elapsed time, remaining time, percentage elapsed and percentage remaining. These values update live from the clock without manual Refresh(). It MAY additionally show an item's share of the containing schedule, but that percentage must be labelled distinctly from time-progress percentage.
Schedule contains stable ScheduleID, Name, timezone/applicability/recurrence settings and ordered ScheduleItemIDs. ScheduleItem contains stable ScheduleItemID, title, start/end, optional colour/icon/location, References[] and optional links to EventID, PlannerTaskID or AssignmentID.
Schedules MAY be reusable/recurring and support date-specific exceptions without destroying the base pattern. Clicking a ScheduleItem opens details such as elapsed/remaining progress, previous/next item and its linked Planner entities/artifacts.
If a ScheduleItem references an Event, PlannerTask or Assignment, the reference remains canonical; changing the referenced entity does not create a divergent duplicate Schedule item payload except for Schedule-owned presentation fields.
Optional sidebar module: Countdown
Countdown is a dashboard of user-defined future targets such as birthdays, holidays, prom, deadlines or other milestones. Countdown entries have stable CountdownID, Name, TargetDate/TargetDateTime, timezone/all-day semantics, icon/image/category metadata where used, recurrence?, References[] and optional linked EventID/AssignmentID.
A Countdown can be standalone or linked to another canonical Planner entity. When linked, the linked entity's date/time is authoritative so moving that Event/Assignment automatically updates the Countdown rather than leaving two conflicting dates.
The dashboard MAY vary displayed precision by proximity, for example days when far away and hours/minutes/seconds when close, while preserving the same target. All-day Countdowns are date-based. Recurring Countdowns such as annual birthdays/holidays resolve the next occurrence deterministically.
Optional sidebar module: Assignments
Assignment represents structured homework, coursework, project/team work, revision deliverables or similar deadline-based work that needs richer completion tracking than a simple PlannerTask. Assignment has stable AssignmentID, Title, Description?, Status, StartDate?, DueAt/date?, CompletedAt?, Priority?, Category/Course/Project metadata?, owner/scope, Assignees/RelevantPeople, RequiredItems[], OptionalItems[], References[], Reminders[], AutomationRefs[] and revision.
AssignmentItem has stable AssignmentItemID, AssignmentID, parent/nesting relationship?, title/description, Required/Optional classification, completion/progress state, optional weight, optional assignee and revision. Required and optional items remain distinguishable in UI, API, Automations and completion rules.
Assignment progress and completion
Assignments MUST support partial completion rather than only Done/Not Done. Required statuses include at least Not Started, In Progress, Completed and Cancelled; overdue is derived from the due date versus completion state and MUST be queryable even if represented visually as a status badge.
Progress MAY be automatically calculated from required items, manually set for work that cannot be represented as a checklist, or calculated using explicit item weights. Equal weighting is the default only when no weights are supplied. Optional items do not prevent formal completion.
By default, an Assignment cannot be marked Completed while required items remain incomplete. A user may explicitly override that rule where permitted, with a visible warning/impact confirmation. Automation/API calls must make an equivalent override explicit rather than silently bypassing required items.
Assignment views MUST include useful states such as Due soon, Overdue, In progress, Completed and All, with filters/grouping such as due date, course/project/team, priority and assignee where data exists.
Team assignments
Assignments MAY have an owner, assignees/contributors and item-level assignees. Being named as an assignee or relevant person does not itself grant edit permission; normal sharing/ACL state remains authoritative.
Assignment-level completion can aggregate item work across people while preserving who completed/changed each item where audit/history is available.
Assignment Automations and extension workflows
Planner exposes Assignment events/state to Automations, but Planner itself MUST NOT secretly send external communications as a built-in overdue side effect. A user may create an Automation such as: when an Assignment becomes overdue and is incomplete, draft or send a Mail extension request to the relevant person.
The workflow boundary is strict: Planner owns Assignment state; Automations owns trigger/condition execution; Mail owns sending. Automatic external sending requires the applicable authorised Mail permission/trust grant and remains subject to the global external-side-effect/risk model.
Useful Assignment event families include AssignmentCreated, AssignmentUpdated, AssignmentProgressChanged, AssignmentDueSoon, AssignmentOverdue, AssignmentCompleted, AssignmentReopened and item-completion events. Automations can query DueAt, Status, Progress, RequiredItems, OptionalItems, assignees and references through typed Planner APIs.
Cross-app typed references
Planner references MUST use the owning app's canonical stable IDs and permissions. A referenced artifact may render a preview/embedded surface only through the owning app's declared reference/embed contract.
If a referenced entity is unavailable, revoked or deleted, the Planner item remains valid and surfaces the reference as unavailable/broken; Planner MUST NOT delete the Event/Task/Assignment simply because one attachment/reference disappeared.
Maps and travel integration
Planner Events MAY carry both Location and a canonical Maps RouteID. Route ownership remains with Maps. Planner may display current route summary/duration and can offer a departure reminder derived from Event start minus current route duration minus an explicit user buffer.
Derived travel reminders MUST NOT rewrite the Event's actual start time. A changed Maps route/duration is reflected from the canonical route rather than a stale Planner copy.
Mail integration
Mail may create or update Planner items through typed Planner actions while retaining a reference to the source MessageID/ThreadID. AI-extracted date/time/title values that are materially uncertain must be reviewable rather than silently committed as certain facts.
Planner mutations do not mutate the source Mail thread except through a separate authorised Mail action.
Meetings, attendees and external side effects
Events MAY support attendees, invitations, meeting references/links and RSVP state where the local/provider capability supports them. Provider-backed attendee/invitation operations remain provider-aware.
When saving a change can send invitations, updates or cancellations externally, Planner MUST distinguish local/save-only behaviour from save-and-notify/send behaviour where the provider supports that distinction. Consequential attendee communication uses the normal permission/impact rules.
External calendars and provider capability model
Planner supports 9to1-native calendars and connected provider calendars through External App Integrations. Provider-backed entities remain provider-aware rather than being silently copied into an unrelated local calendar.
Provider capabilities MUST be explicit and queryable, including relevant support for read/write, recurrence, attendees, free/busy, reminders, meeting links, colours/categories, calendar sharing, task support and push/change feeds. Unsupported operations must be hidden/disabled or return a structured ProviderCapabilityUnsupported error.
Connected-provider changes should use incremental change feeds/push where supported. Provider sync state distinguishes pending/synced/conflict/failed where relevant; conflicts MUST NOT be resolved by blind last-write-wins.
Search, filtering and global discovery
Planner search MUST cover Events, PlannerTasks, Assignments, Countdowns and Schedule entities where enabled. Filters MAY include date range, calendar/list, status/completion, category/project/course, assignee/attendee, location and referenced entity.
Search results preserve stable Planner IDs and open the canonical item. Planner entities that are eligible for Home/global search expose permission-filtered searchable metadata through the shared search/index contract.
Import and export
Planner MUST support iCalendar/.ics import and export for representable calendar data. Import preserves timezone/recurrence/attendee semantics when the format/provider can represent them and reports unsupported constructs rather than silently flattening them.
Importing data creates/links canonical Planner/provider entities according to the selected destination semantics; it MUST NOT create duplicate copies when a stable imported/provider identity already maps to an existing entity.
Persistent AI bar
Planner MUST host the global persistent Dulche AI bar. Its semantic context includes selected Event/PlannerTask/Assignment/Countdown/Schedule IDs, selected date/time range, visible calendar interval, active calendars/lists/modules, current timezone, relevant references, revision/sync state and the available typed Planner actions.
Read-only mode cannot mutate planning state. Write mode uses typed 9to1.Planner actions and the normal Home permission broker. Natural-language changes such as moving a set of tomorrow's events MUST resolve against stable entity/occurrence IDs rather than inferred screen coordinates.
Automations integration
Planner recurrence remains Planner state; repeating Events/Tasks MUST NOT be implemented as hidden Automations. Automations consumes Planner's typed events/actions for workflows around those entities.
Minimum automatable event families include EventCreated, EventUpdated, EventStarting, EventEnded, PlannerTaskCreated, PlannerTaskDue, PlannerTaskCompleted, ReminderFired and the Assignment event families defined above. For recurring items, event payloads include the concrete occurrence identity as well as the series identity.
Planner API
Planner's first-party API catalogue is exhaustive under the global API-parity rule. Minimum canonical entry points include:
9to1.Planner.ListCalendars();
9to1.Planner.GetCalendar(calendarID);
9to1.Planner.ListEvents(range, filters?);
9to1.Planner.GetEvent(eventID, occurrence?);
9to1.Planner.CreateEvent(config);
9to1.Planner.UpdateEvent(eventID, patch, recurrenceScope?);
9to1.Planner.DeleteEvent(eventID, recurrenceScope?);
9to1.Planner.RestoreEvent(eventID);
9to1.Planner.ListTasks(filters?);
9to1.Planner.GetTask(plannerTaskID);
9to1.Planner.CreateTask(config);
9to1.Planner.UpdateTask(plannerTaskID, patch);
9to1.Planner.CompleteTask(plannerTaskID);
9to1.Planner.ReopenTask(plannerTaskID);
9to1.Planner.ListAssignments(filters?);
9to1.Planner.GetAssignment(assignmentID);
9to1.Planner.CreateAssignment(config);
9to1.Planner.UpdateAssignment(assignmentID, patch);
9to1.Planner.UpdateAssignmentItem(assignmentItemID, patch);
9to1.Planner.CompleteAssignment(assignmentID, overrideIncompleteRequiredItems?);
9to1.Planner.ListSchedules(filters?);
9to1.Planner.GetSchedule(scheduleID);
9to1.Planner.CreateSchedule(config);
9to1.Planner.UpdateSchedule(scheduleID, patch);
9to1.Planner.ListCountdowns(filters?);
9to1.Planner.CreateCountdown(config);
9to1.Planner.UpdateCountdown(countdownID, patch);
9to1.Planner.AddReference(itemID, reference);
9to1.Planner.RemoveReference(itemID, referenceID);
9to1.Planner.AddReminder(itemID, reminder);
9to1.Planner.SnoozeReminder(reminderID, until);
Every additional user-visible Planner operation — including provider actions, sidebar-module operations, recurrence edits, assignment item manipulation, reminder management and import/export — MUST expose an equivalent supported typed action/query.
Persistence, sync, history and recovery
Planner native state is versioned and crash-safe. Calendar/Event/PlannerTask/Assignment/Schedule/Countdown changes use revision-aware mutations; partial failure must not leave a recurrence series or Assignment hierarchy half-updated.
Normal deletion is recoverable where the entity/storage provider supports recovery. Permanent purge is explicit/high-risk. Provider-backed deletion/recovery follows provider capability while preserving local audit/sync state.
Offline/reconnect queues MUST preserve operation identity/idempotency. Provider conflicts and concurrent same-entity edits surface deterministic merge/conflict state rather than silently overwriting one revision.
Permissions and risk
Read, edit, share/admin, provider/external-side-effect and destructive scopes remain distinct. Having a Planner item in view does not grant permission to mutate its referenced artifact, invite attendees, send Mail or operate a connected provider beyond the caller's authorised capabilities.
Invitation/cancellation sending, external Mail extension requests, provider sharing changes, permanent purge and destructive bulk changes retain their target action's elevated risk/approval requirements.
Accessibility
Planner MUST be keyboard-operable across calendar grids, Agenda, task/assignment lists, Schedule and Countdown. Time-grid cells/items expose meaningful accessible date/time labels; current item/progress and overdue state cannot be conveyed by colour alone.
Screen readers MUST be able to identify item type, title, date/time/due state, recurrence and applicable progress. Schedule percentages and countdown values require textual equivalents. Reduced motion and scalable text/layout follow the global CUI accessibility contract.
Platform capability behaviour
Planner MUST provide useful supported native behaviour on Windows and 9to1-OS plus a useful web version under the global web contract. All clients operate on the same canonical Planner/provider entities.
Native clients MAY have richer OS notification/calendar integration; web may depend on browser notification/background constraints. Capability differences are explicit and MUST NOT silently downgrade the canonical planning state or turn the web app into a read-only viewer.
Performance and resource behaviour
Calendar range queries load only the visible/requested interval plus bounded prefetch; recurring-series expansion is interval-bounded. Large Agenda/task/Assignment lists MUST virtualise. Provider change feeds and shared indexes update incrementally rather than repeatedly refetching all calendars/items.
Schedule live-progress and Countdown ticking MUST update efficiently without causing full Planner-tree rerenders each second. Background timers should coalesce/update at the precision actually visible to the user.
Failure behaviour
Planner MUST return structured failures for EventNotFound, PlannerTaskNotFound, AssignmentNotFound, ScheduleNotFound, CountdownNotFound, InvalidRecurrence, InvalidTimeZone, RevisionConflict, PermissionDenied, ProviderCapabilityUnsupported, ProviderSyncConflict, ReferenceUnavailable, ReminderUnavailable and ImportUnsupportedConstruct, plus the global error contract.
If Home notification/shared services are unavailable, Planner preserves canonical planning state and surfaces notification/reconnect limitations rather than losing Events/Tasks/Assignments. Provider outages preserve queued/retryable state with explicit sync status.
Acceptance requirements
Planner is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
Today, Day, Week, Month, Agenda and Tasks views operate on persisted canonical Planner entities and survive restart.
Agenda lists upcoming Events/scheduled tasks/Assignment deadlines chronologically without duplicating their underlying identities.
Scheduling/unscheduling a PlannerTask changes its scheduled window without creating/deleting a duplicate Event.
Timezone, all-day and daylight-saving tests preserve intended event meaning across viewer/device timezone changes.
Recurring series support occurrence/this-and-following/whole-series edits, exceptions and bounded expansion.
Reminders route through Home notifications and snoozing does not rewrite the item's canonical time.
Schedule can be enabled as an optional sidebar module and shows live elapsed/remaining time plus percentage elapsed/remaining for the current item.
Countdown can be enabled as an optional sidebar module, supports standalone and linked targets, and linked targets update without duplicated dates.
Assignments can be enabled as an optional sidebar module and persist partial progress, required/optional items, nested/weighted items where configured, due state, team assignments and completion rules.
An overdue Assignment can trigger an authorised Automation that drafts/sends a Mail extension request without Planner bypassing Mail/Automation permission rules.
Maps routes, Mail threads and Files/Write/Present/Boards/Canvas/Data/Space/Automation outputs remain canonical typed references when attached to Planner items.
Provider calendars capability-negotiate recurrence/attendees/reminders/etc. and synchronise without silent last-write-wins conflict loss.
iCalendar import/export round-trips representable recurrence/timezone data and reports unsupported constructs.
The persistent AI bar reads/writes Planner only through permission-filtered semantic context and typed Planner actions.
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical entity model while surfacing declared capability differences.
Large calendar ranges/lists/recurrences remain responsive through bounded expansion, incremental sync/indexing and virtualisation.
When Home is absent at process start, Planner follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract rather than launching an incompatible private runtime.
Automations
Product role and execution boundary
9-1 Automations is the ecosystem-wide workflow-definition and orchestration app. It owns Automation definitions, triggers, control flow, durable execution state and Run history. It does not reimplement the business logic of target apps: every app/device/provider/third-party action executes through the canonical typed action exposed by its owning capability and retains that capability's permissions, risk classification, result/error schema, idempotency semantics and audit trail.
Home owns the shared Node Graph Framework and permission/trust broker. Automations owns Automation entities and orchestration semantics. Dulche executes AI/model/Agent work. Target 9to1 apps, connected services, third-party apps and devices execute their registered typed actions. Raw mouse/keyboard UI automation is non-conformant where a typed action exists.
Landing page: Home and Library
The Automations landing surface has two primary sections: Home and Library.
Home is an operational dashboard. It surfaces recent runs, currently running/waiting workflows, failures/Needs Attention, upcoming scheduled triggers, permission/connection problems, commonly used Automations and concise execution-health information.
Library is the canonical list of the user's Automations. It supports search, sort/filter, enabled/disabled state, owner/scope, last run, next trigger when determinable, current active revision, connection/permission health and create/duplicate/share/delete/recover operations.
Home dashboard cards MUST open the canonical Automation or AutomationRun rather than creating separate dashboard state. The landing page SHOULD make Create Automation prominent without forcing a user into an empty graph before they understand what they are creating.
Canonical entities
Automation MUST have stable AutomationID, Name, Description?, Icon?, Owner/Scope, Enabled/OperationalState, GraphID, DraftRevisionID, ActiveRevisionID?, InputSchema?, OutputSchema?, TriggerSummary, RequiredCapabilities, ExecutionPolicy, CreatedAt, ModifiedAt and Revision.
AutomationRun MUST have stable RunID, AutomationID, pinned AutomationRevisionID, TriggerID/TriggerEventID, Status, StartedAt, FinishedAt?, typed Inputs, typed Outputs?, NodeExecutionStates, Error?, approval/wait state, causal ancestry and audit/ActionGraph references.
Editing, renaming, moving, sharing or changing the landing-page position of an Automation MUST NOT change AutomationID. A Run is historical execution state and MUST remain bound to the exact Automation revision it executed.
Draft and Active revisions
Automations use the Node Graph Framework's Draft/Active revision model. Editing an active Automation changes a Draft revision. New trigger executions continue using the current Active revision until the user validates and activates/publishes a newer Draft.
An already-running Run remains pinned to its starting revision even if another revision is activated. Activation is atomic. Previous valid Active revisions remain available for inspection and rollback subject to retention policy.
Graph editor and simple creation
The graph is the canonical executable definition. Automations MAY offer simple When / If / Then creation, templates or natural-language creation, but these are graph-authoring views over the same GraphID rather than separate simplified formats. Opening an Automation MUST always allow inspection of the real graph.
The primary advanced editor uses the Home-owned Node Graph Framework with Automations' capability profile, typed ports, pan/zoom, selection, grouping/comments, copy/paste, undo/redo, validation, Draft/Active state and execution overlays.
Node search and connector interaction
Node creation/search MUST follow an Unreal-style graph interaction pattern. Right-clicking empty graph space opens the node list at that location; the user can immediately type to filter/search registered node types and select a result to create the node at/near the invocation point. Results SHOULD be grouped by meaningful categories while search ranks direct action/event/type matches first.
Connector deletion MUST support Ctrl-click directly on a connection/connector to remove it. Right-clicking a connection opens its context menu with Delete Connector as an explicit action. Keyboard-accessible selection plus Delete/Backspace MUST provide an equivalent non-pointer path. Deleting a connector removes only that connection, never either connected node.
Search results come from the live registered node catalogue for the current capability profile, target platform/device availability and installed/connected integrations. Automations MUST NOT maintain a stale hard-coded copy of the ecosystem's available actions.
Trigger model
Minimum trigger families:
Manual — explicit user/API invocation.
Schedule — timezone-aware one-time or repeating schedules such as a specific time, daily/weekly rules or interval schedules.
App Event — typed events published by 9to1 apps.
Condition/Watch — reevaluate a typed predicate when relevant state changes or on an explicitly declared evaluation cadence where event-driven evaluation is unavailable.
External/Connector Event — supported webhooks/provider events/plugin/MCP/connector events.
Automation invocation — typed call from another Automation.
Triggers use typed payloads. Schedule triggers preserve timezone/DST semantics. Event-driven state change MUST be preferred to wasteful polling when an owning capability provides an event/change feed. Trigger delivery MUST have stable identity/deduplication semantics.
Node families
The Automations capability profile MUST include registered node families needed for mature workflow composition, including:
Triggers.
9to1 app Actions and Queries.
Device Actions.
Third-party app/service Actions.
Conditions, Switch/branch and comparisons.
Variables, constants, data access and transforms/conversions.
Wait/Delay.
For Each/iteration.
Parallel/Fan-out and Join.
Approval/Human review.
Retry, On Failure, fallback and error handling.
Call Automation.
Dulche/Agent/Skill/Plugin/MCP/Connector capabilities.
Typed Output/Return.
Connections are type-checked through the Node Graph Framework. Incompatible ports cannot connect unless a registered explicit conversion/transform exists.
Device-level actions
Automations MUST expose an extensive device-level action catalogue sourced directly from the capabilities actually advertised by the current/selected Home or Mesh device. Device actions are not a small hand-maintained Automations list. When a device/runtime exposes a supported typed action, Automations can surface it subject to OS/device permissions and the Home trust broker.
Representative device actions include, where the device advertises them:
Wi-Fi on/off and supported network-selection/state operations.
Bluetooth on/off and supported connection/device operations.
Always On Display on/off plus supported AOD profiles/settings.
Lock Screen Clock position, design/style and other supported lock-screen clock properties.
Display/brightness, sound/volume, notification/DND, power/battery, input, connectivity and other device settings/actions exposed safely by the device capability registry.
Every device action node records the required DeviceID/capability/action version or an explicit compatible-device targeting policy. The editor MUST warn when an action is device-specific or not portable and explain that it may not work on another device. Validation on another device MUST report capability mismatch rather than silently substituting a different action.
Cross-device execution uses Mesh typed remote capability invocation and therefore passes both caller-side and target-device permission/policy checks. Automations MUST NOT turn device actions into a generic remote-desktop or arbitrary-code-execution channel.
Third-party app and service actions
Automations MUST surface typed third-party app/service actions wherever an installed app, plugin, connector, MCP capability, operating-system integration or registered provider exposes them. Discovery is dynamic and versioned, not a fixed list baked into Automations.
Third-party actions carry the originating capability/provider identity, connection/account requirements, input/output schemas, platform/device availability and risk/side-effect classification. Missing/uninstalled apps or expired connections place affected nodes into a clear Needs Attention/capability-unavailable state.
Example: a Schedule trigger at 16:00 may connect to a registered YouTube/compatible media action that plays a specified video on a selected compatible device. The workflow remains a typed trigger-to-action graph; Automations does not emulate YouTube by screen clicking.
Natural-language graph creation and editing
Dulche can create and modify Automations from natural-language requests, but the result MUST be a real editable Node Graph mutation using typed Node Graph APIs. Generated natural-language descriptions are explanatory only and are never the canonical workflow definition.
AI-generated graphs MUST validate node/action schemas, connection types, permissions/capabilities and target availability before activation. The editor SHOULD visually highlight nodes/connections added or changed by the most recent AI operation and allow ordinary undo.
Data, variables and nullability
Each Run has a typed data environment. Trigger payload fields, node outputs, variables and action inputs can be connected directly where types are compatible. Data transforms use explicit registered nodes/functions rather than implicit lossy conversion.
False, null, unavailable/redacted and error are distinct. Missing data MUST NOT silently become zero, False or an empty string and accidentally take the wrong branch.
Durable Wait and resume
Wait/Delay MUST be durable. A Run that waits for seconds, days, a time/date, device availability, approval or another supported condition persists a continuation record and releases active execution resources. It MUST NOT depend on an application thread/process literally sleeping.
Restart/redeployment must resume a valid waiting Run from persisted state without repeating already-committed side effects. ResumeAt/condition metadata and revision identity are inspectable.
Approval nodes
Approval/Human Review is a first-class node. It pauses a Run with WaitingForApproval and presents the intended decision/action to the appropriate authorised user. Approval, rejection, timeout and cancellation are explicit outcomes usable by subsequent graph branches.
An Approval node is distinct from Home's permission broker. Approval expresses workflow-required human review; the broker determines whether the caller is authorised to execute the protected action. Either mechanism may independently block execution.
Permissions, connections and secret handling
Each Automation has a stable caller identity bound to AutomationID/workspace identity. Activating a revision MUST show/derive the capabilities and action scopes the active graph requires. Expanding an Automation from a lower-risk action such as Mail.CreateDraft to Mail.Send or adding a new device/provider scope requires normal permission/trust reevaluation.
Secrets, tokens and provider credentials MUST NOT be stored as plaintext node properties. Nodes reference Home/connector-managed ConnectionID/secret handles. Sharing a graph does not automatically share the owner's credentials, external account access or trust grants.
Execution location and device targeting
Execution policy MUST make where the workflow can run explicit. Supported executors may include 9to1 cloud, the current Home/device runtime, a selected compatible Mesh device or a provider-native executor where that provider/action supports it.
The UI MUST NOT claim that a device-bound Automation will execute while all required devices are offline. Conversely, a cloud-capable workflow MUST NOT unnecessarily depend on an open desktop UI.
A device-targetable node may require a specific DeviceID, any compatible paired device or the triggering device according to its declared targeting policy. If no compatible device is available, the Run follows its configured wait/retry/failure policy with an explicit DeviceCapabilityUnavailable/DeviceOffline state.
Run lifecycle and operational state
Automation definition operational states include at least Draft, Enabled, Disabled and NeedsAttention. AutomationRun states include at least Queued, Running, Waiting, WaitingForApproval, Paused, Completed, Failed and Cancelled.
Disabling an Automation prevents new trigger starts but does not silently delete history. If Runs are already active, the UI must explicitly offer a policy such as allow existing Runs to finish, pause them where safe, or cancel them.
Home dashboard/Library status MUST be derived from canonical definition/run/connection state, not a separately editable status field.
Run history and execution inspection
Every Run has a structured execution timeline showing trigger, node start/end, typed input/output summaries, target action, attempt number, duration, waiting/approval state, result/error and causal child-run references. Sensitive values are redacted according to permissions.
The structured Run record is authoritative. Dulche may summarise it in natural language but MUST NOT invent events or hide failed/denied/cancelled nodes.
Users can open a historical Run against the exact pinned graph revision even after the current Automation has changed.
Error handling, retry and idempotency
An unhandled node failure stops the affected path by default. Authors may explicitly add retry, On Failure, fallback or continue semantics.
Retries of external or destructive actions MUST use the target action's idempotency/OperationID contract where available. If the runtime cannot determine whether a timed-out consequential action committed, it MUST enter a typed uncertain/Needs Attention state rather than blindly repeat an operation that could duplicate its external side effect.
Retry policies are bounded and inspectable; infinite automatic retry loops are prohibited.
Loop and cascade protection
Runs carry TriggerEventID, RunID, ParentRunID? and causal ancestry. The runtime MUST detect repeated event/run cycles, bound recursion/cascade depth and total execution budget, and deduplicate replayed trigger deliveries.
If an Automation repeatedly triggers itself or another Automation in a causal loop, the affected cascade is stopped with a diagnostic that identifies the loop rather than continuing to mutate user data indefinitely.
Calling other Automations
Call Automation invokes another Automation by stable AutomationID and declared InputSchema/OutputSchema; it does not copy the target graph into the caller. The callee keeps its own version, permissions and Run history while parent/child Run causality is linked.
Test, validate and run
The editor MUST distinguish Validate, Test and Run for real.
Validate performs graph/schema/type/capability/permission/connection checks without executing actions.
Test executes with selected sample/current data and MUST use action preview/dry-run facilities where the target capability provides them.
Run for real executes the active or explicitly selected validated revision with normal side effects and permissions.
If a Test reaches an action that cannot be safely simulated, Automations must identify that limitation and require explicit real-execution confirmation before performing the side effect.
Sharing, teams and run-as identity
Automations MAY be shared within supported personal/team/workspace scopes. Sharing the definition does not transfer credentials, provider connections, device permissions or Always Trust grants.
Where shared execution supports multiple identities, run-as semantics MUST be explicit, such as triggering user versus Automation owner/service identity. The runtime MUST NOT silently choose whichever identity has greater authority.
Compatibility and migration
Every registered node type/action/event records schema/version identity. If an app/device/provider update retires or incompatibly changes a node schema, the graph enters NeedsAttention/migration state rather than silently dropping the node, retyping a port or changing behaviour.
Migration may be automatic only when semantics are provably equivalent; otherwise the editor must show the affected nodes and require review before reactivation.
Persistent contextual AI bar
Automations MUST host the global persistent Dulche AI bar. Its semantic context includes AutomationID, GraphID, Draft/Active revisions, selected NodeIDs/ConnectionIDs, validation state, Run/connection/permission state, registered node catalogue and typed graph mutation actions.
Read-only mode can explain/debug/inspect. Write mode may modify the graph only through typed Node Graph/Automation APIs. AI MUST NOT simulate graph mouse gestures.
Automations API
Automations' first-party API catalogue is exhaustive under the global API-parity rule. Minimum canonical entry points include:
9to1.Automations.List(filters?);
9to1.Automations.Get(automationID);
9to1.Automations.Create(config);
9to1.Automations.Update(automationID, patch);
9to1.Automations.Delete(automationID);
9to1.Automations.Restore(automationID);
9to1.Automations.Validate(automationID, revision?);
9to1.Automations.Activate(automationID, revision);
9to1.Automations.Disable(automationID);
9to1.Automations.Run(automationID, inputs?, revision?);
9to1.Automations.CancelRun(runID);
9to1.Automations.PauseRun(runID);
9to1.Automations.ResumeRun(runID);
9to1.Automations.GetRun(runID);
9to1.Automations.ListRuns(automationID, filters?);
9to1.Automations.RetryRun(runID, fromNodeID?);
9to1.Automations.ListAvailableActions(context?);
9to1.Automations.ListDeviceActions(deviceID?);
Graph editing remains on 9to1.NodeGraph.* rather than duplicating graph-mutation methods inside Automations. Every additional user-visible Automations operation — Library organisation, connection repair, permission review, execution-policy change, sharing, migration and run controls — requires equivalent typed API coverage.
Persistence and recovery
Automation definitions, Draft/Active revisions, Runs, wait/approval continuations, trigger cursors/deduplication state and connection references are durably versioned. A crash/restart MUST NOT restart the graph from the beginning and duplicate already-committed actions.
Normal Automation deletion is recoverable; permanent purge is explicit/high-risk. Run-history retention/purge follows declared policy and audit requirements.
Accessibility
The landing Home/Library, node graph and Run inspector MUST be keyboard-operable and accessible. Node search can be opened without a pointer; nodes, ports and connectors expose semantic labels/types; connection creation/deletion has keyboard equivalents; execution/error states cannot be conveyed by colour alone.
Graph zoom/pan must not be required to discover the textual meaning of a node. A structured accessible node/connection list or equivalent semantic representation MUST be available to assistive technology.
Performance and resource behaviour
Large graphs, Libraries and Run histories MUST virtualise where appropriate. Node catalogue search must remain responsive across extensive app/device/third-party action registries and should query/index incrementally rather than blocking on full capability rescans.
Execution is event-driven/durable; idle/waiting Runs must not retain unnecessary UI/execution threads. Run logs/timelines paginate/stream incrementally and caches are bounded.
Failure behaviour
Automations MUST return structured failures including AutomationNotFound, RunNotFound, InvalidGraph, ValidationFailed, NodeTypeUnavailable, ConnectionTypeMismatch, CapabilityUnavailable, DeviceCapabilityUnavailable, DeviceOffline, ProviderConnectionUnavailable, PermissionRequired, ApprovalRejected, ApprovalTimedOut, WaitResumeFailed, RevisionConflict, TriggerDuplicate, LoopDetected, ExecutionBudgetExceeded, UnsafeRetryState and MigrationRequired in addition to target-action errors.
A missing third-party app, disconnected provider or unavailable device never causes the runtime to pretend an action completed; affected definitions/runs surface Needs Attention or the configured wait/failure path.
Acceptance requirements
Automations is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
Landing Home shows canonical operational dashboard state and Library lists persisted user Automations with search/filter/status/last-next-run information.
Opening an Automation exposes its real Node Graph; simple/natural-language creation produces the same canonical graph rather than a hidden alternate workflow format.
Right-click empty graph space opens an Unreal-style searchable node list; typing filters the live registered catalogue; Ctrl-click on a connector deletes it and right-click offers Delete Connector.
Draft and Active revisions remain distinct; activating a new revision does not mutate an already-running Run pinned to an older revision.
Manual, Schedule, App Event, Condition/Watch, external/provider and Automation-call triggers deliver typed payloads with deduplication identity.
A representative extensive device action registry is discovered from real device capabilities, including available Wi-Fi/Bluetooth/AOD/lock-screen-clock actions, and device-specific portability warnings/capability validation are shown.
Third-party app/service actions appear from installed/connected capability registries and missing/unavailable integrations enter a diagnosable Needs Attention state.
A schedule at 16:00 can invoke a registered YouTube/compatible media Play action on a compatible target device without UI simulation.
Natural-language graph creation/editing produces valid typed Node Graph mutations and remains fully inspectable/undoable.
Durable Wait and Approval nodes survive process/device/runtime restart without replaying committed prior actions.
Retries use idempotency semantics and uncertain external side effects do not blindly repeat.
Self-triggering/cross-Automation loops are detected and stopped with causal diagnostics.
Validate, Test and Run-for-real remain distinct and Test does not silently perform unsimulatable external actions.
Shared Automations do not inherit another user's credentials/device permissions/trust grants and run-as identity remains explicit.
Schema/version changes place incompatible graphs into migration/Needs Attention rather than silently altering behaviour.
The persistent AI bar inspects/edits graphs only through semantic context and typed APIs.
Large node catalogues/graphs/run histories remain responsive through indexing, virtualisation and incremental loading.
When Home is absent at process start, Automations follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract rather than launching an incompatible private permission/runtime stack.
Creativity Apps
Picture
Product role and editing-first boundary
9-1 Picture is the native CUI image creation, editing and composition app for raster, vector and hybrid visual work. Its primary purpose is powerful creation/editing, not passive image viewing. Picture MUST support professional-grade manual editing, simple object-first workflows, non-destructive composition, AI-assisted editing, generative image creation, sketch-to-image conversion and advanced vector tooling while remaining approachable to users who do not want to manage low-level layer structure.
Browsing/viewing/library workflows remain supported but are secondary to Create, Edit and Generate. Core crop/transform/colour/vector/text/drawing/export workflows MUST remain fully usable when AI is disabled, unavailable or disallowed.
Shared-engine reuse and fast feature parity
Picture MUST reuse the mature shared engines already used by Write, Present, Canvas and Boards whenever capability overlaps. It MUST NOT create Picture-private duplicates of shared drawing, text, shape, selection, transform, clipboard, accessibility, undo/history or embedded-object semantics merely for implementation convenience.
Required reuse includes at minimum:
The Home-owned Shared Productivity Engine for shared text, shapes, media/object identity, selection, transform, clipboard/transfer, accessibility and typed object actions where those semantics apply.
The Rnote-derived shared drawing/ink engine already used by Canvas and Boards for pens, strokes, pressure/tilt, eraser behaviour, stroke serialisation and drawing selection/manipulation.
Shared shape/vector primitives, transform handles, snapping/alignment and object manipulation behaviours already exercised by Present/Canvas/Boards where applicable.
Shared rich-text/typography primitives from Write/Present for editable text objects rather than a second incompatible text engine.
Shared Files identity/storage, CUI runtime, Home permission/trust, persistent AI bar, revision/action conventions and cross-app artifact references.
Where Picture needs a capability that logically belongs in one of these shared engines, the implementation SHOULD extend that shared engine centrally and enable the new capability for other eligible apps rather than fork it inside Picture. This reuse is a release requirement intended to accelerate feature parity and keep behaviour identical across the ecosystem.
Canonical Picture document model
Picture MUST use a versioned editable PictureDocument rather than treating the current rendered bitmap as the sole source of truth. A document has stable DocumentID, optional backing FileID/source revision, canvas/artboard geometry, colour profile, background, canonical ElementGraph/LayerGraph, linked assets, edit history/revisions, metadata and document revision.
DocumentType supports Raster, Vector and Hybrid. Hybrid documents can contain raster content, editable vector paths/shapes, text, generated objects, masks, drawing/ink, adjustments and linked assets in one document without destructive flattening.
Every independently editable object has stable ElementID plus ElementType, parent/group identity, bounds/transform, visibility, lock state, blend/compositing properties where applicable, mask/effect references, metadata and revision. Renaming/reordering does not change identity.
Automatic composition mode and manual layers
Picture uses automatic composition/layer management by default. Typical users can select, move, erase, resize, generate, recolour or annotate objects without manually constructing a Photoshop-style layer stack. Picture automatically creates/updates the internal objects, masks, adjustment state and generated fills required to keep the edit non-destructive.
Manual Layer mode is an optional advanced view over the SAME canonical document model. It exposes explicit layers/groups, masks/clipping, order, visibility, locks, opacity, blend modes, adjustment/effect layers and names. Switching between automatic and manual views MUST NOT flatten or convert the document.
Automatic mode may group implementation details into understandable objects such as Subject, Background, Text or Generated Object while preserving the full internal structure for advanced inspection/editing.
Layer and composition semantics
The canonical layer/composition graph MUST support at minimum RasterImage, VectorShape, VectorPath, Text, Drawing/Ink, GeneratedObject, Adjustment, Fill, Mask, Group, Artboard/Canvas, Background and Linked/Smart Asset element families.
Layer/object order determines compositing order. Groups preserve child identity. Masks remain independently editable. Adjustment/effect nodes SHOULD remain non-destructive and apply to explicit target scope rather than permanently rewriting source pixels.
A user can rasterise/flatten selected content explicitly, but Picture MUST NOT silently flatten editable content merely because a tool is easier to implement that way.
Selection and semantic object extraction
Picture MUST provide a mature selection system including rectangle, ellipse, lasso, polygonal/freehand lasso, brush/refine, colour/range selection and smart/semantic selection where AI/vision capability exists. Selection operations include add, subtract, intersect, invert, feather, expand/contract and edge refinement where applicable.
Semantic/object selection can identify a subject/object/background and convert the result into an independently editable Picture element/mask. The user can also circle or roughly mark a subject and ask Picture to infer the intended object boundary.
Selection state is not itself document identity unless explicitly saved as a mask/object, but saved masks/selections receive stable IDs and participate in history/revisions.
Object-first editing
A selected object/subject MUST support direct Move, Resize, Rotate, Duplicate, Delete/Erase, Replace, Isolate, Recolour/Restyle and front/back ordering actions where compatible.
When an object is moved, resized away from its previous occupied area or erased, Picture can use generative/background reconstruction to fill exposed gaps. The original underlying elements MUST remain revision-addressable so the edit can be undone/reverted or regenerated.
Example: circling a person and dragging them left creates/updates an editable subject object, relocates that subject, reconstructs the exposed background, and preserves both the subject and generated repair as editable/revisioned state rather than destructively baking the result.
Raster editing
Core raster editing MUST include at least:
Crop, rotate, flip, straighten, resize/resample, canvas resize and perspective correction.
Free transform, warp/distort and perspective transform where supported.
Exposure, brightness, contrast, highlights, shadows, whites/blacks, gamma/levels and curves.
Temperature, tint, saturation, vibrance, hue and channel/colour adjustments.
Sharpen, clarity/detail, denoise, blur and other declared filters/effects.
Clone/heal/repair, redaction/blur/pixelate and local adjustment tools.
Background removal/extraction and alpha/transparency-aware editing.
Raster operations SHOULD be represented as non-destructive adjustments/masks/transform state where technically practical. An operation that must bake pixels MUST create a revision boundary with reversible history.
Vector creation and editing
Picture MUST provide powerful vector creation/editing suitable for serious illustration, asset and graphic-design work, with depth comparable to mature Photoshop-class vector/path tooling while keeping common actions simple.
Required vector capabilities include:
Rectangle/ellipse/polygon/star/line/arrow and shared shape primitives.
Pen/path tool, anchor-point editing, Bézier handles, open/closed paths and path segment manipulation.
Fill, stroke, stroke width/alignment, opacity and gradient/pattern support where available.
Boolean path operations: union/add, subtract, intersect and exclude/XOR.
Group/ungroup, align, distribute, snap, transform, duplicate and precise positioning.
Masks/clipping paths and vector effects where supported.
Text-on-path and convert-text-to-path where supported.
Rasterise vector selection and supported raster/vector tracing or conversion workflows.
Vector objects remain vector-editable until explicitly rasterised/flattened. Raster and vector elements can coexist in the same Hybrid PictureDocument.
Text objects
Text is a first-class editable object using shared Write/Present typography primitives where applicable. Picture text tools MUST support font family/style/size, colour/fill/stroke, line height, alignment, tracking/kerning where supported, transform/rotation, text box/area text, point text and appropriate effects.
Advanced vector-text behaviours such as text on path and convert to path SHOULD reuse the vector engine. Text must remain editable as text until the user explicitly converts/rasterises it.
Drawing and painting
Picture MUST reuse the shared Rnote-derived drawing engine for sketching, painting/markup and mask/selection brush workflows rather than implementing a separate stroke format. Supported drawing behaviours inherit Canvas/Boards pen, pressure/tilt, eraser, stroke selection/manipulation and custom pen/preset capability where relevant.
Picture may expose a simplified context-specific toolbar, but underlying stroke behaviour/serialisation remains shared. Sketch strokes can be retained as editable Drawing elements, used as masks/annotations, or supplied to AI generation as structural guidance.
AI editing and generative operations
AI editing is a first-class core Picture capability rather than an optional afterthought. Picture MUST support typed, revisioned AI operations including object removal, object replacement, generative fill, generative erase, generative expand/outpainting, background remove/replace, object move/resize with scene reconstruction, style/appearance change, image restoration/enhancement, upscaling, relighting/recolour assistance and prompt-based region/full-image editing where the configured model/tool supports them.
AI operations MUST target explicit DocumentID/ElementID/SelectionID/MaskID/revision context rather than inferred screen coordinates. Results become canonical editable Picture state or explicit generated variants; they MUST NOT silently overwrite the only source.
If a selected region is moved or deleted, generated background repair is scoped to the exposed/selected region and recorded separately enough to permit undo, regenerate or variant comparison.
Generative image creation
Picture MUST create new images from text prompts, sketches, reference images, mixed prompt+reference+sketch inputs and supported style/composition guidance. Generation controls include at least output size/aspect ratio, background/transparency intent where supported, reference inputs, style guidance and variant count/options exposed by the selected model/tool.
Generated results become normal Picture documents/assets that can immediately be edited with raster/vector/text/drawing tools. Generation history and input provenance remain associated with the created revision/variant.
Sketch-to-image
Sketch-to-image is a dedicated workflow. Users can draw a rough composition/shape layout with the shared drawing engine, optionally annotate regions with text or references, and generate a detailed image while retaining the original sketch and generation relationship.
Sketch-to-image MUST support iterative workflows such as sketch -> generate -> edit -> select region -> regenerate/refine. The user may preserve the sketch as an editable overlay/reference rather than losing it after generation.
Generative region editing
The user can define a region by smart selection, lasso, brush/mask, shape or current object and invoke typed actions such as Remove, Replace, Move, Resize, Recolour, Restyle, Extend or Generate In Region.
Remove reconstructs the missing area; Replace creates replacement content constrained to the selected region/context; Move/Resize preserve the selected subject while repairing exposed background; Extend generates outside current content/canvas bounds. Generated output is revisioned and attributable to the operation/input scope.
AI-assisted composition
Picture MAY support high-level composition instructions such as rebalance composition, reposition subject, change background, restyle a poster, convert a rough concept to a polished visual or convert a sketch to a clean vector-like design. These MUST resolve to inspectable canonical Picture mutations/variants rather than an opaque final bitmap when the requested operation can remain editable.
Non-destructive adjustments and edit stack
Picture MUST preserve non-destructive editability for transforms, crop, colour/light adjustments, effects, masks, vector/text objects and generative operations where technically possible. The app maintains an ordered edit/composition graph rather than repeatedly recompressing the source image after each slider or AI action.
Users can enable/disable or modify prior compatible adjustments, reorder compatible operations, compare before/after, and revert to original/source revision. Invalid reordering that would change unsupported dependency semantics must be rejected or require an explicit bake/convert step.
Variants and revision history
Picture provides session undo/redo plus persistent revision history. Users can preserve multiple generated/manual variants, compare them and branch/save a new variant without destroying the original.
AI operations record operation type, source revision, selected region/object references, prompt/reference inputs and result revision/tool provenance where available. Generated narrative summaries are not the authority; the structured operation/revision record is.
Smart/linked assets
Picture supports linked/smart assets where appropriate, including linked raster/vector/Picture assets that retain source identity and can be transformed/effected without immediate destructive embedding. Updating the source can update the linked representation subject to revision/conflict rules.
The user can explicitly embed/freeze/snapshot a linked asset when a self-contained result is required.
Crop, canvas and artboards
Crop MUST support Free, Original, common ratios such as 1:1, 4:3, 3:2, 16:9 and 9:16, plus custom ratio and straighten/rotation. Crop remains editable until explicit flatten/export semantics require baking.
PictureDocument MAY support one or more artboards/canvases for vector/graphic workflows. Artboard identity/bounds/background are explicit and export can target one artboard, selected artboards or the composed document.
Effects, blend and masks
Picture MUST support mature effect/blend workflows including opacity, blend modes, blur/sharpen, shadow/glow and other registered effects where the rendering backend supports them. Effects should be non-destructive and target explicit elements/groups/masks.
Mask editing uses the shared drawing/selection engine where appropriate. Clipping/masking behaviour must be deterministic and preserved through save/reopen.
Presets
Users can save, rename, duplicate, reorder, apply and delete/recover reusable edit/effect presets. Presets are typed operation/property sets, not opaque flattened filters, so applied settings remain editable.
AI-assisted presets MAY exist but MUST record which operations are deterministic versus model-generated.
Comparison and preview
The editor MUST provide Original/current comparison and SHOULD provide split/side-by-side before/after. Preview rendering may use reduced resolution for interactivity but final export/save renders from the canonical source/revision at declared quality.
Expensive effects/generation/export expose progress and cancellation without corrupting the last valid document state.
File formats and import
Picture MUST support mature viewing/import/edit/export workflows for common raster formats including JPEG, PNG, WebP, GIF, BMP and TIFF, plus HEIF/HEIC, AVIF and other formats where maintained codec support exists. Animated/multi-frame formats MUST preserve animation unless the user explicitly chooses a flattening conversion.
SVG/vector import/export SHOULD preserve editable vector structure where compatible. RAW support MAY be capability-dependent but, where enabled, must preserve the RAW source and use a non-destructive development/render path.
Unknown/unsupported format features must be surfaced rather than silently stripped.
Animated and multi-frame images
Viewer/editor support for animated formats includes playback/pause, frame stepping and timeline/info. Editing operations define whether they apply to current frame, selected frames or all frames. A tool that would flatten animation MUST warn and require an explicit convert/flatten path.
Colour management and HDR
Picture MUST honour embedded colour profiles and alpha/transparency. sRGB is the safe baseline; wide-gamut/HDR display/edit behaviour is capability-negotiated where supported. Unsupported profiles/HDR paths must use a declared fallback/transform rather than silently displaying materially wrong colour.
Final export MUST allow appropriate colour-profile handling and warn when a target format cannot represent the working colour space/dynamic range.
Metadata and privacy
Picture's Info/Metadata view exposes available dimensions, format, file size, colour profile, capture date, camera/lens/exposure details, orientation, location and other supported EXIF/IPTC/XMP metadata. Unknown metadata should be preserved through non-destructive round trips where possible.
Export/privacy controls MUST support preserving metadata, removing location metadata and removing all removable metadata where the target format supports it.
Save, export and flattening
Save persists the editable Picture document/revision for the canonical asset. Save a Copy creates a new Files asset. Export renders to a selected interoperable target format/settings. Revert to Original restores/bypasses editable operations without deleting the source.
Formats that cannot store Picture's editable composition are exported as rendered/flattened outputs while the canonical Picture edit state remains separately persisted against the Picture document/asset. Flattening the editable source itself requires an explicit action.
Export options include size/resolution, format/compression/quality, transparency/background, colour profile, metadata/privacy and applicable animation/vector options.
Files and canonical asset identity
Files remains authoritative for filesystem/storage identity and operations such as open, create, rename, move, copy, delete/recover, share, provider/cloud hydration and bytes. Picture MUST NOT create a hidden duplicate file store.
A Picture asset/document can reference a canonical FileID plus source revision. Renaming/moving the file does not detach Picture state. CloudOnly content hydrates through Files and exposes progress/failure.
Cross-app interoperability
Picture assets can be embedded/referenced in Write, Present, Boards, Canvas and Spaces through canonical identity. A live reference follows the selected canonical asset/revision policy; an explicit Snapshot/Copy freezes or duplicates content.
Cross-app paste/drag/drop uses the Shared Productivity Engine/Files transfer contracts so supported raster/vector/text/drawing structure is preserved instead of automatically flattening to pixels.
Persistent AI bar
Picture MUST host the global persistent Dulche AI bar. Semantic context includes DocumentID/FileID, revision, selected ElementIDs/SelectionID/MaskID, current tool/mode, relevant composition/layer structure, canvas/artboard geometry, available metadata, linked assets and typed Picture actions.
Read-only mode can analyse/explain/describe without changing the document. Write mode performs edits only through typed Picture/shared-engine actions. AI MUST NOT simulate raw pointer gestures when semantic object/selection APIs exist.
Picture API
Picture's first-party API catalogue is exhaustive under the global API-parity rule. Minimum canonical entry points include:
9to1.Picture.Open(fileID);
9to1.Picture.Create(config);
9to1.Picture.GetDocument(documentID);
9to1.Picture.ListAssets(filters?);
9to1.Picture.ListElements(documentID, filters?);
9to1.Picture.GetElement(documentID, elementID);
9to1.Picture.AddElement(documentID, element);
9to1.Picture.UpdateElement(documentID, elementID, patch);
9to1.Picture.RemoveElement(documentID, elementID);
9to1.Picture.MoveElement(documentID, elementID, transform);
9to1.Picture.GroupElements(documentID, elementIDs);
9to1.Picture.Ungroup(documentID, groupID);
9to1.Picture.CreateSelection(documentID, selection);
9to1.Picture.UpdateSelection(documentID, selectionID, patch);
9to1.Picture.ApplyAdjustment(documentID, target, adjustment);
9to1.Picture.Crop(documentID, crop);
9to1.Picture.Resize(documentID, size);
9to1.Picture.AddMask(documentID, target, mask);
9to1.Picture.Generate(documentID?, request);
9to1.Picture.GenerateInRegion(documentID, selectionOrMaskID, request);
9to1.Picture.RemoveObject(documentID, elementOrSelectionID, options?);
9to1.Picture.ReplaceObject(documentID, elementOrSelectionID, request);
9to1.Picture.MoveObjectWithFill(documentID, elementOrSelectionID, transform, options?);
9to1.Picture.ExtendCanvas(documentID, bounds, request?);
9to1.Picture.SketchToImage(documentID, drawingElementIDs, request);
9to1.Picture.Save(documentID);
9to1.Picture.SaveCopy(documentID, destination, options?);
9to1.Picture.Export(documentID, format, options);
9to1.Picture.GetHistory(documentID);
9to1.Picture.Revert(documentID, revisionID);
Shared drawing/text/shape/selection/clipboard primitives SHOULD use their owning shared API namespace where that is the canonical operation. Picture MUST NOT duplicate the same shared action under incompatible semantics.
Automation and Spaces integration
Automations, Spaces and Dulche can invoke the exhaustive Picture action catalogue subject to permissions/capabilities. Long-running generation/render/export operations return job/run state with progress, cancellation and typed errors.
Picture publishes typed events for meaningful document/revision/generation/export changes without flooding Automations with raw pointer/stroke-move events.
Collaboration and conflict handling
Picture mutations are revision-aware. Independent edits may merge where the canonical object graph proves them non-conflicting; concurrent incompatible edits to the same element/mask/layer/revision MUST surface a conflict rather than blind last-write-wins.
AI-generated edits are attributable to a revision/action actor and are undoable/reviewable through the same history system as manual changes.
Security and generated content
AI/image generation/editing follows configured model/tool permissions, content controls, privacy/local-cloud routing policy and source-asset access permissions. Picture MUST NOT upload local/private images to a remote model/provider when the effective privacy policy forbids it.
Generated/imported external content is treated as content, not executable code. Embedded metadata/scripts MUST NOT acquire application execution privileges.
Accessibility
Picture's Create/Edit/Generate/Browse surfaces MUST be keyboard-operable for required workflows. Sliders/controls expose names, values and keyboard adjustment. Layer/object lists, tools, masks and selection state expose meaningful semantic accessibility information.
Image descriptions/alt text MAY be stored/edited where applicable. Colour-only indicators require textual/semantic equivalents. Zoom/crop/transform handles have keyboard-accessible alternatives.
Platform capability behaviour
Picture MUST provide useful Windows, 9to1-OS and web editing/creation experiences over the same PictureDocument model. Codec, RAW, HDR, GPU effect, pen/tilt and local/remote AI capability differences are explicit and queryable.
The web app MUST NOT degrade into a read-only image viewer. Unsupported platform features are disabled with a capability reason while preserving the canonical document so another capable client can continue editing.
Performance and resource behaviour
Picture MUST use resolution-appropriate decode, GPU acceleration where suitable, incremental/tiled rendering for very large images, bounded preview/thumbnail caches, background full-quality rendering and cancellable long-running jobs.
Interactive edit previews may use reduced-resolution proxies, but final save/export renders from canonical source content at requested quality. Large layer/vector graphs should avoid full-document rerenders when only a bounded element/region changes.
AI-generated previews/variants and caches are bounded and revision-addressed. Closing or cancelling generation does not corrupt the last valid document.
Failure behaviour
Picture MUST return structured failures including DocumentNotFound, ElementNotFound, InvalidSelection, InvalidMask, UnsupportedFormat, UnsupportedCodecFeature, ColourProfileUnsupported, HDRUnsupported, RevisionConflict, LinkedAssetUnavailable, GenerationUnavailable, GenerationFailed, InvalidGenerationRegion, ExportUnsupportedFeature, RenderFailed, PermissionDenied and CapabilityUnavailable in addition to shared engine/model errors.
A failed edit/generation/export leaves the prior valid document revision intact. Unsupported export features are reported before destructive flattening/conversion.
Acceptance requirements
Picture is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
A real Raster, Vector and Hybrid PictureDocument can be created, saved, closed and reopened with editable structure intact.
Automatic composition mode allows ordinary users to create/edit complex images without manual layer management, while Manual Layer mode exposes the same underlying canonical structure without conversion.
Shared Write/Present/Canvas/Boards productivity, text, shape, selection/transform and Rnote-derived drawing engines are actually reused rather than reimplemented as Picture-private equivalents.
Raster editing covers crop/transform, light/colour, blur/sharpen/repair and masks with non-destructive/revision-aware behaviour.
Vector editing covers path/anchor/Bézier editing, fills/strokes, boolean operations, snapping/alignment, text/path integration and raster/vector conversion workflows.
A user can circle/smart-select a subject, freely move/resize/delete/replace it, and Picture reconstructs exposed background while preserving revisioned editable state.
Generative fill/erase/replace/extend and background replacement operate on explicit selections/objects and preserve source/revision provenance.
Text-to-image, reference-guided creation and sketch-to-image create normal editable Picture assets/documents rather than opaque temporary results.
Sketch-to-image can use shared drawing-engine strokes and supports iterative region refinement.
Manual drawing/painting/markup uses the shared Rnote-derived drawing engine and retains editable stroke semantics.
Before/after comparison, variants, undo/redo and persistent revision history survive restart.
Raster, vector, text, generated objects, masks and linked assets coexist correctly in a Hybrid document.
Save, Save Copy and export preserve the editable source while producing interoperable rendered/vector outputs with explicit flattening where required.
Files identity survives rename/move/hydration and live cross-app references remain canonical.
The persistent AI bar performs semantic typed edits against selected objects/regions and never requires raw UI simulation.
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical document model while capability-negotiating codecs/GPU/AI/pen differences.
Large source images/layer graphs remain interactive through tiling/proxy rendering/bounded caches and final export renders at requested source quality.
When Home is absent at process start, Picture follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract rather than launching an incompatible private runtime.
Wave
Product role and native-generation principle
9-1 Wave is the native CUI audio recording, editing, mixing, sequencing and sound-creation app. It combines an approachable multitrack editor with professional waveform/spectral editing, mixing, effects, music sequencing, sound-effect construction, text-to-speech and AI-assisted production.
All generated audio components MUST be native, structured Wave components whenever the requested result can be represented by Wave's own sequencer, synthesis, effect, speech or clip systems. AI MUST NOT normally return an opaque arbitrary waveform as the canonical result for music, sound effects, speech or other structured generative workflows. Rendering to audio is a derived/export/playback result; the editable native component remains canonical.
Example: asking AI to create a song produces editable sequencer/instrument/pattern/arrangement data; asking for a laser sound creates an editable Sound Effect Builder patch; asking for narration creates a native Text-to-Speech object retaining its text/voice/prosody settings.
Shared media/audio engine
Wave MUST share its core audio/media primitives with Motion, Present and other eligible 9to1 surfaces rather than creating incompatible per-app audio engines. The shared media/audio layer owns canonical audio assets, clips, time ranges, transport/playback, waveform/spectrogram analysis, effect descriptors, rendering/export primitives and realtime-safe audio processing where applicable.
Motion uses the same compatible audio clip/effect/timeline primitives for video projects. Present recording/narration uses compatible Wave/shared-media assets. Vision & Voice contributes shared microphone/device discovery, OS audio permissions and applicable capture primitives, while Wave remains the persistent production editor. Dulche Audio/Voice supplies model-backed transcription, analysis and speech capability without becoming a second project model.
GStreamer is an approved maintained media backend and GStreamer Editing Services or an explicitly documented equivalent may be used where appropriate. Backend choice MUST preserve the public Wave project/action contracts.
Canonical project model
WaveProject has stable ProjectID, sample-rate/channel configuration, timeline/timebase, tempo map where used, Tracks[], Markers/Regions[], native generated components, project settings, CreatedAt/ModifiedAt and Revision.
AudioTrack has stable TrackID, name, ordered Clips[], Gain, Pan, Mute, Solo, RecordArm, Effects[], AutomationLanes[], routing/bus state where supported and Revision.
AudioClip has stable ClipID, SourceAssetID or native GeneratedComponentID, source range, TimelineStart, Duration, Gain, fades, stretch/pitch settings, effects/automation references and Revision. Timeline editing MUST be non-destructive by default.
Generated native components receive stable IDs and can be inserted on tracks like other sources while retaining their editable structured source. Rendering a component for playback/export does not replace that structured source.
Main workspace and transport
Wave's primary workspace is a multitrack timeline with transport, track controls, selected clip/component inspector and optional mixer/effects/sequencer/spectral panels. Record, Edit, Mix and Generate are workflow emphases over one project rather than incompatible document modes.
Transport MUST include:
Play, Pause, Stop and Record.
Seek to start/end and previous/next marker or region.
Loop playback/recording.
Timeline position display with time/timecode and musical bars/beats where enabled.
Playback speed and metronome/count-in where relevant.
Keyboard-first editing shortcuts are required for repetitive timeline operations.
Recording
Wave MUST support robust microphone/device recording including input-device selection, mono/stereo/multichannel where available, input monitoring, level meters/clipping indication, record-arm per track, count-in/pre-roll/post-roll, punch-in/punch-out, overdub, loop/take recording and pause/resume.
Recording is written incrementally/crash-safely so a process or device failure does not discard an entire long recording. Incomplete recoverable takes remain clearly marked until finalised.
Waveform and clip editing
Required clip/waveform operations include:
Select time range, move, duplicate, copy/paste, split and join/compose where semantically valid.
Trim, slip/source-range edit, delete, ripple delete and insert/ripple move.
Fade in/out and crossfade.
Gain/normalise, silence, reverse, resample, time-stretch and pitch-shift.
Snap to grid, markers, transients, clips or musical timing where enabled.
Ordinary clip edits change clip/source-range/timeline metadata rather than destructively rewriting source bytes. A destructive source edit, where explicitly requested, creates a recoverable revision/new source asset.
Multitrack, mixer, routing and buses
Wave MUST support multiple simultaneous audio tracks for voice, music, sound effects, ambience, generated content, imported media and multiple takes. Track grouping and multi-selection allow coherent edits across related clips.
The mixer provides per-track and master gain, pan, mute/solo, meters, insert effects and supported sends/buses/routing. Advanced routing may be hidden by default but the canonical project supports it where exposed.
Master processing is explicit and non-destructive. Export rendering follows the current routing/effect graph.
Effects and parameter automation
Core non-AI effect families include at least:
EQ/filtering including high/low-pass and parametric EQ.
Compressor, limiter, gate/expander and de-esser.
Reverb and delay.
Chorus/flanger/phaser and modulation effects where supported.
Distortion/saturation.
Pitch shift/time stretch.
Stereo width, gain/normalisation and utility processing.
Effects are non-destructive insert/processing nodes by default and can be reordered, bypassed, edited and removed.
Effect/track/instrument parameters may be automated over time using native automation lanes/curves. Automation data is structured and editable rather than baked into a rendered waveform.
Spectral editing and repair
Wave MUST provide Waveform, Spectrogram and combined Waveform+Spectrogram views. Time/frequency selections can drive attenuation, filtering, silence, repair and model-assisted cleanup operations.
Native/manual repair includes where supported:
Click/pop removal.
DC offset correction.
Hum/notch filtering.
Noise reduction and gating.
Clipping repair where technically possible.
Silence trimming and loudness normalisation.
AI-assisted cleanup MAY isolate speech, remove/reduce noise, reverb, clicks, breaths/coughs, restore damaged recordings and perform other model-backed repair, but outputs remain represented as native derived clips/effect operations/revisions rather than silently overwriting the source.
Audio enhancement and denoising tools
Wave MUST expose first-class Enhance Audio and Denoise tools for selected clips, tracks, time ranges and imported or recorded audio. Enhance Audio is a configurable restoration/mastering pipeline, not a single opaque AI button. At minimum it MUST be able to combine appropriate noise/hum reduction, de-click/de-pop, de-reverb where available, clarity/EQ correction, dynamics/level correction and loudness normalisation; speech-focused enhancement MAY use model-backed processing. Denoise MUST provide an automatic one-click path plus an advanced path with strength/amount and preview/bypass. Where the selected backend supports noise-profile learning, Wave MUST allow a selected region to be used as the noise profile.
Enhancement and denoising MUST be previewable, undoable and non-destructive. Long-running model-backed processing MUST expose progress and cancellation. The source asset remains intact; Wave stores the configured processing and/or derived result with provenance. Applying enhancement MUST NOT silently modify unrelated clips, tracks, effects or master routing.
Music Sequencer
Wave MUST include a first-class native music sequencer. Music generation, whether user-authored or AI-assisted, produces editable sequencer content rather than an arbitrary final audio file.
The sequencer supports stable SequenceID/PatternID/NoteEventID/InstrumentID identities, tempo/time-signature maps, piano-roll and step-sequencer editing, note pitch/start/duration/velocity, quantisation, swing/groove, looping patterns, arrangement sections, track/instrument assignment and parameter automation.
Drum sequencing supports drum-grid/pad-oriented patterns, per-step velocity/probability/variation where supported and reusable kits. Melodic sequencing supports chords, scales/key assistance where enabled, note expression and automation.
The arrangement view assembles patterns/regions into song structure such as Intro, Verse, Chorus, Bridge and Outro without flattening them. Users can duplicate/modify a pattern instance or create a linked instance according to explicit identity semantics.
Native instruments and sampling
The sequencer MUST provide a versioned instrument registry. Native instrument families MAY include synthesizers, drums/percussion, sampler instruments and other maintained engines. Each Instrument has structured editable parameters, preset identity/version and automation-capable controls.
Sampler instruments reference canonical audio assets and expose mapped key/range, start/end, loop, pitch/tuning, envelope/filter and other supported parameters without duplicating source bytes unnecessarily.
AI may choose/configure instruments, write notes/patterns, create arrangement structure, automate parameters and mix tracks, but MUST produce the same native Sequencer/Instrument/Effect objects a user can inspect and edit manually.
AI music generation
A request such as 'make a two-minute upbeat electronic track' MUST generate a native music project/section: tempo and meter, sequencer tracks, instrument choices/settings, editable note/pattern data, arrangement, automation and effects/mix state. The canonical AI result is NOT an opaque two-minute waveform.
AI may iterate by editing native structures: 'make the chorus heavier' changes relevant patterns/instruments/automation/effects; 'change the chord progression' rewrites note/chord events while preserving unrelated project structure.
Generated music can subsequently be manually edited in piano roll/step sequencer/mixer. Export renders the structured project into WAV/FLAC/MP3/etc. only when requested.
Sound Effects Builder
Wave MUST include a native Sound Effects Builder for procedural/constructed sound effects. A SoundEffectPatch has stable PatchID and a structured processing/generation graph rather than being merely a rendered audio clip.
The builder SHOULD use the Home Node Graph Framework for editing/visualisation where appropriate, with Wave-specific realtime audio nodes and execution handled by the Wave audio engine.
Core SFX node families include where supported:
Oscillator/wavetable/source generators.
Noise generators.
Sampler/audio-asset sources.
Envelope/ADSR and amplitude shaping.
Pitch/frequency modulation and LFO.
Filters/EQ.
Distortion/waveshaping.
Delay/reverb/modulation effects.
Layer/mix/split/combine.
Randomisation/probability and parameter modulation.
Output/render.
A request such as 'create a futuristic laser blast' causes AI to build/configure an editable native patch graph, envelopes, oscillators/noise, pitch movement and effects. The generated patch can be auditioned and inserted onto the timeline, but the patch remains the canonical editable source.
The UI SHOULD offer simple high-level macro controls for common users while allowing advanced users to open the complete patch graph.
Text to Speech
Wave MUST include native Text-to-Speech components. A SpeechSynthesis object stores stable SpeechID, text/script, selected VoiceID/model/runtime, language/locale, pronunciation/phoneme overrides where supported, speed, pitch, style/emotion/prosody controls, timing/alignment metadata and revision.
Editing the text or voice/prosody regenerates the derived speech render while retaining the same structured SpeechSynthesis source. Speech may be split into utterances/paragraphs/regions and aligned on the timeline without flattening into an anonymous generated waveform.
Where a TTS backend exposes word/phoneme timings, Wave stores them for transcript/alignment editing. Export may render speech to ordinary audio, but the editable Wave project retains the speech component.
Voice cloning/conversion or user-supplied voice references, if supported, require the applicable consent/permission and provenance rules.
Other generated native components
The same native-generation rule applies to generated ambience, transitions and other constructible audio. AI should build Wave-native source/processing structures — for example layered samplers plus filters/envelopes/automation for ambience — instead of defaulting to opaque audio generation.
When a capability fundamentally requires an externally generated waveform that cannot be represented by existing native generators, that waveform MAY enter Wave only as an explicit GeneratedSample source asset with model/provenance metadata. It MUST then be treated like a normal editable sample/clip, and the UI must not pretend it has native sequencer/patch editability. Native structured generation remains the default and required path whenever representable.
Transcription and transcript-based editing
Wave transcription is time-aligned to project/source audio and can include speaker diarisation, word timing, language detection, punctuation and corrections where supported. Clicking/selecting transcript text maps to the corresponding audio range.
Transcript-based edits such as deleting a phrase or removing long pauses translate into ordinary native timeline/clip edits after preview/validation. The transcript is a semantic editing view over canonical audio/timeline state, not a replacement authority for the audio project.
Custom censorship
Wave MUST include Custom Censorship for a selected clip, track, time range or whole-project audio scope. A CensorshipRuleSet can contain exact words, phrases, user-defined terms and one or more semantic themes/categories. Word and phrase rules use time-aligned transcription where available; theme rules MAY use supported model-backed semantic classification. Detection MUST produce reviewable candidate time ranges before application, and the user MUST be able to add, remove or adjust matches to correct false positives and false negatives.
Each rule or rule set can choose a treatment including bleep/tone, mute/silence, attenuation, replacement with a user-selected sound, or timeline removal when explicitly chosen. Controls MUST include pre/post padding and fades, and MAY optionally redact matched text from captions/transcripts. Censorship remains a structured editable operation with stable identity; it can be disabled, reconfigured or undone without altering the original source. Export/render follows the active censorship state.
Audio separation and derived stems
Where configured model/backends support it, Wave can separate mixed audio into structured derived assets/tracks such as vocals, drums, bass, other/music, speakers or foreground/background. Source audio remains preserved and the separated outputs receive stable asset/track identities.
AI separation is a transformation workflow, not an excuse to destroy or replace the source.
Stem splitting MUST be exposed as a first-class Split Stems tool rather than only as an AI command. The UI MUST offer every separation mode supported by the configured backend, including common modes such as Vocals/Instrumental, Vocals/Drums/Bass/Other, speaker separation and Foreground/Background where available. The user can choose which derived stems become tracks, preview/audition the result and re-run separation with a different supported mode without replacing the original mixed source.
Markers, regions and chapters
Wave supports stable MarkerID and RegionID entities for navigation, looping, chapters, editing targets and export metadata. Markers/regions may carry names, colours/categories, notes and references without changing underlying clip data.
Podcast, narration and spoken-word workflows
Podcast/spoken-word workflows reuse normal Wave tracks, transcript, markers, effects and export rather than creating a separate engine. Useful capabilities include multi-speaker editing, chapter markers, silence cleanup, loudness targets, intro/outro, metadata and transcript export.
Present narration and other 9to1 speech assets can open in Wave for detailed editing while retaining canonical timing/asset references.
Motion and Present interoperability
Motion and Wave MUST share compatible audio asset/clip/effect/timeline primitives. A Motion audio track can be opened/edited in Wave and return as the same canonical audio/project reference where supported, avoiding an unnecessary export-edit-import loop.
Present recording/narration can use compatible Wave/shared-media assets and can deep-link to Wave for advanced cleanup/mix/editing without losing timing/reference identity.
Files and storage identity
Files remains authoritative for source/export asset storage identity, create/move/rename/delete/recover/share and provider/cloud hydration. Wave project structures reference stable FileID/asset identities rather than absolute file paths.
Recorded/generated/imported assets receive canonical storage/asset identity. Moving/renaming the underlying File does not detach the Wave reference.
Import and export
Wave import MUST support common maintained codecs/formats through the shared media backend. Source sample rate, channels, timing and metadata are preserved where applicable.
Export can target full project, selected region, track(s), stems, selected clips or selected native generated components. Common outputs include WAV, FLAC, MP3, AAC/M4A and OGG/Opus where supported, plus other maintained codecs.
Export options include sample rate, bit depth where applicable, bitrate/quality, channel layout, loudness/normalisation, metadata and relevant loop/chapter settings. Export never silently mutates the project.
Persistent AI bar
Wave MUST host the global persistent Dulche AI bar. Semantic context includes ProjectID, selected TrackIDs/ClipIDs/GeneratedComponentIDs, selected time/frequency range, playhead, markers/regions, sequencer patterns/notes/instruments, SFX graph selection, speech object/text, effects/automation state, transcript selection, sample rate/timebase and revision.
Write-capable AI changes Wave only through typed Wave/shared-media/NodeGraph actions. It MUST NOT simulate timeline mouse gestures when semantic APIs exist.
Wave API
Wave's first-party API catalogue is exhaustive under the global API-parity rule. Minimum canonical entry points include:
9to1.Wave.CreateProject(config);
9to1.Wave.Open(projectOrFileID);
9to1.Wave.AddTrack(projectID, config);
9to1.Wave.AddClip(projectID, trackID, source, placement);
9to1.Wave.SplitClip(projectID, clipID, time);
9to1.Wave.TrimClip(projectID, clipID, sourceRange);
9to1.Wave.MoveClip(projectID, clipID, placement);
9to1.Wave.SetTrackProperty(projectID, trackID, property, value);
9to1.Wave.AddEffect(projectID, targetID, effect, config?);
9to1.Wave.SetEffectParameter(projectID, effectID, parameter, value);
9to1.Wave.SetAutomation(projectID, targetID, parameter, points);
9to1.Wave.StartRecording(projectID, trackID, config);
9to1.Wave.StopRecording(recordingID);
9to1.Wave.Transcribe(projectID, target, options?);
9to1.Wave.CreateSequence(projectID, config);
9to1.Wave.AddPattern(sequenceID, config);
9to1.Wave.AddNote(patternID, noteEvent);
9to1.Wave.UpdateNote(noteEventID, patch);
9to1.Wave.CreateInstrument(projectID, instrumentType, config);
9to1.Wave.CreateSoundEffectPatch(projectID, config);
9to1.Wave.RenderSoundEffectPatch(patchID, options?);
9to1.Wave.CreateSpeech(projectID, text, voiceConfig);
9to1.Wave.UpdateSpeech(speechID, patch);
9to1.Wave.Cleanup(projectID, target, operation);
9to1.Wave.Enhance(projectID, target, config);
9to1.Wave.Denoise(projectID, target, config);
9to1.Wave.CreateCensorshipRuleSet(projectID, config);
9to1.Wave.UpdateCensorshipRuleSet(ruleSetID, patch);
9to1.Wave.DetectCensorship(projectID, target, ruleSetID, options?);
9to1.Wave.ApplyCensorship(projectID, target, ruleSetID, treatmentConfig);
9to1.Wave.Separate(projectID, target, mode);
9to1.Wave.Export(projectID, target, format, options);
Sound Effect Builder graph mutation uses 9to1.NodeGraph.* where the shared Node Graph Framework is the canonical graph-editing layer. Shared media operations SHOULD use their owning shared API namespace when that is canonical.
Automation and integration events
Automations, Spaces, Dulche and other authorised clients can use the exhaustive Wave action catalogue. Long recording/render/export/transcription/separation jobs expose progress, cancellation, retry/idempotency where relevant and typed result/error state.
Wave emits meaningful typed events such as project/revision changes, recording completed, export completed, render failed and generated component changed; it MUST NOT flood Automations with raw per-sample or pointer events.
Collaboration and revision conflicts
Project/track/clip/pattern/note/patch/speech mutations are revision-aware. Independent object edits MAY merge when safe; incompatible concurrent edits to the same canonical object surface conflict rather than blind last-write-wins.
A running render/export/recording is pinned to the required source/project revision and MUST NOT silently switch to a newly edited revision mid-job.
Accessibility
Wave MUST be keyboard-operable for transport, clip selection/editing, sequencer editing, mixer controls, transcript editing and generated-component workflows. Waveforms/spectrograms provide semantic time/level/frequency information and non-pointer equivalents for required operations.
Meters, clipping, mute/solo, automation and error states MUST NOT rely on colour alone. Screen-reader users can inspect track/clip/note/patch/speech object identity and values.
Performance and realtime safety
The realtime audio path MUST remain isolated from blocking UI, disk, AI/model, network and export work. Playback/recording cannot glitch merely because waveform thumbnails, transcription, generation or export are running.
Waveforms/spectrograms are incrementally analysed/cached; large recordings are streamed/tiled rather than fully decoded into RAM. Realtime-safe effect/instrument processing obeys bounded allocation/latency constraints.
Generated sequencer/SFX/TTS components render incrementally/cached for preview while preserving the structured source. Background renders are cancellable and caches are bounded/revision-invalidated.
Recovery and failure behaviour
Wave durably stores project structure, current recording chunks/takes, native generated-component state and edit history often enough to maximise crash recovery. Restart can recover incomplete recordings/project mutations without replaying committed destructive actions.
Structured failures include ProjectNotFound, TrackNotFound, ClipNotFound, GeneratedComponentNotFound, InvalidTimeRange, InvalidSequence, InvalidPattern, InstrumentUnavailable, InvalidSoundEffectGraph, VoiceUnavailable, RecordingDeviceUnavailable, RecordingFailed, CodecUnsupported, RenderFailed, ExportFailed, RevisionConflict, PermissionDenied and CapabilityUnavailable, plus shared backend/model errors.
A failed AI/native generation/render/export leaves the prior valid project and source assets intact.
Platform capability behaviour
Wave MUST provide useful Windows, 9to1-OS and web editing/creation experiences over the same canonical project model. Input devices, realtime audio APIs, codecs, plugin/instrument backends, MIDI/controller access and local/cloud model capabilities are explicit/queryable.
Web MUST remain a useful multitrack/sequencer/editor experience rather than a static player. Unsupported platform capabilities are disabled with a clear reason while preserving project state for another capable client.
Acceptance requirements
Wave is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
A multitrack project can be recorded, edited, mixed, closed/reopened and exported while preserving stable TrackID/ClipID/revision identity.
Recording supports device selection, metering, track arm and crash-safe recovery of an interrupted take.
Waveform clip editing is non-destructive and split/trim/move/fade/crossfade/undo survive restart.
Mixer/effects/automation are structured and editable, with realtime playback remaining stable during background work.
Waveform/spectrogram editing and native/audio-model repair operate without destroying the original source.
Music Sequencer persists editable note/pattern/instrument/arrangement/automation data and can render/export the result.
An AI music request generates a native sequencer arrangement with editable notes, patterns, instruments and effects instead of an opaque waveform.
Sound Effects Builder persists an editable native patch graph and an AI request such as a laser sound generates/configures that graph rather than only returning rendered audio.
Text-to-Speech persists editable text/voice/prosody state and regenerated speech remains linked to the same native SpeechSynthesis component.
Generated ambience/transitions use native Wave generators/patches/components whenever representable; an unavoidable external GeneratedSample is explicitly identified as a sampled fallback with provenance.
Transcript-based deletion maps to ordinary timeline edits and remains undoable.
Separation produces derived stable tracks/assets while preserving the mixed source.
Enhance Audio and Denoise are available as ordinary manual tools, support preview/bypass or equivalent before commitment, remain undoable/non-destructive and preserve the original source.
Custom Censorship can detect at least an exact word/phrase rule and a semantic-theme rule, exposes detected ranges for review/correction, applies the selected treatment and remains reversible without altering the source.
Split Stems is directly accessible from the Wave UI, creates stable derived track/asset identities for a supported separation mode and preserves the original mixed source.
Motion/Present interoperability uses shared canonical audio primitives rather than export/import duplication.
The persistent AI bar edits tracks/clips/sequences/patches/speech through typed APIs rather than raw UI simulation.
Large projects/recordings remain responsive through streaming, incremental analysis and bounded caches.
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same project/generated-component model while capability-negotiating audio hardware/backend differences.
When Home is absent at process start, Wave follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract rather than launching an incompatible private runtime.
Motion
Product role and native project principle
9-1 Motion is the native CUI video editing, compositing, animation and motion-graphics application. It combines professional non-linear editing, layered visual composition, animation, titles/graphics, colour, audio production, AI-assisted editing and generative-video workflows while keeping the default editing experience approachable.
The canonical result of work in Motion is a structured MotionProject, not a rendered video. Normal edits such as trimming, crop, speed changes, transforms, masks, effects, colour changes, captions, keyframes, procedural animation and AI-assisted mutations MUST remain inspectable editable project state. Rendering, proxies, previews, caches and exports are derived outputs and MUST NOT silently replace canonical project state.
Shared engines and dependency boundaries
Motion MUST reuse shared 9to1 engines aggressively wherever the underlying capability belongs to more than one product. Shared capability MUST live in the appropriate shared engine/library rather than requiring another app UI process or duplicating private implementations.
Motion reuses the Wave/shared-media engine for audio clips, tracks, waveform/spectrogram analysis, effects, mixing, generated speech/music/SFX and audio rendering; Picture/shared visual primitives for compatible raster/vector composition, masks, paths, still-image effects and object-level image manipulation; Present/shared animation primitives for compatible easing, interpolation and timing concepts; the Shared Productivity Engine for compatible text, vector shape, drawing/ink and transform primitives; Rnote-derived drawing/path primitives for annotation, matte/mask drawing and rotoscoping assistance; Files for canonical asset identity; Dulche/model infrastructure for analysis and generation; the shared Node Graph Framework for advanced graphs; and CUI for the shell/navigation/interaction system.
Dependency direction MUST remain acyclic and engine-oriented. Motion MUST NOT require the Picture or Wave UI processes merely to crop an image or adjust audio. Picture, Wave and Motion consume compatible shared implementations. If Motion needs a capability that Picture, Wave, Present or another surface also materially needs, the implementation SHOULD be placed in the owning shared engine rather than copied.
Canonical project model
MotionProject has stable ProjectID, Sequences[], AssetReferences[], GeneratedComponents[], GlobalSettings, ColourSettings, ProxyCacheSettings, CreatedAt, ModifiedAt and Revision.
Sequence has stable SequenceID, Width, Height, PixelAspectRatio, FrameRate/timebase, Duration, VideoTracks[], compatible AudioTracks[], Markers[], Guides/safe-area state where used, colour/HDR state and Revision.
VisualTrack has stable TrackID, name, ordered Elements[], visibility, lock state, compositing state where applicable and Revision. Audio tracks use compatible Wave/shared-media track primitives rather than a second incompatible audio model.
MotionElement has stable ElementID, ElementType, SourceAssetID or GeneratedComponentID where applicable, TrackID, TimelineStart, Duration, SourceRange, Transform, Crop, Opacity, BlendMode, Masks[], Effects[], ParameterAnimation[], graph references where applicable and Revision.
Masks, EffectInstances, AnimationTracks, Keyframes, Titles/TextObjects, CaptionTracks, CaptionCues, analysis records and Motion node-graph objects MUST have stable identity and revision-aware state where they are addressable/editable. AI, Automations, collaboration and undo/redo address canonical object IDs and properties rather than screen coordinates.
Main workspace and contextual editing
The default Motion workspace consists of Media/Assets, Viewer/Canvas, contextual Inspector and Timeline. Panels MAY be docked, resized, collapsed, moved or hidden, but the initial workspace MUST avoid exposing an unnecessarily large professional-panel wall to a new user.
The Inspector is selection-sensitive: selecting video exposes video/transform/effect controls; text exposes typography/layout/animation; masks expose mask/path controls; audio exposes Wave-compatible controls; generated objects expose generation/provenance controls; and no selection exposes sequence/project controls.
Direct manipulation in the Viewer/Canvas MUST mutate the same canonical properties and typed actions used by the Inspector, keyboard operations, APIs and AI. The viewer MUST NOT maintain a separate UI-only transform or mask state.
Timeline and non-linear editing
Motion MUST provide a professional multi-track NLE timeline with accurate frame/timecode semantics, in/out ranges, source/sequence viewing, snapping, multi-selection, markers, grouping, linked audio/video, track controls and nested sequences.
Minimum typed editing operations include insert, overwrite, append, blade/split, trim, ripple trim, roll, slip, slide, ripple delete, lift, extract, move, duplicate, group/ungroup, link/unlink audio and video, track lock, video visibility, audio mute/solo where applicable, range selection and nested-sequence creation/use.
Transport MUST support ordinary play/pause, frame stepping and efficient shuttle/scrub control, including keyboard-first operation such as J/K/L-style transport where appropriate. Editing operations MUST be deterministic at the sequence timebase and MUST NOT depend on pixel coordinates in the timeline UI.
Video tracks may contain video, images, Picture assets, titles/text, vector graphics, shapes/ink, generated media, adjustment/effect layers, nested sequences and other registered compatible visual elements. Timeline editing remains non-destructive by default.
Source media, proxies, preview and cache
Motion MUST separate canonical source media from proxy media, decode caches, analysis caches, preview renders and final render output. Editing against a proxy MUST preserve the same canonical source identity, timing, ElementID and project semantics.
Motion MUST support automatic proxy generation, user-requested proxies, configurable proxy resolution/codec where supported, per-asset proxy state, background generation, lower-resolution viewer playback and render/pre-render caching.
Final render/export MUST use canonical source media at requested output quality unless the user explicitly chooses a proxy-derived or otherwise lower-quality source path. Missing or stale proxies/caches are recoverable derived-state problems and MUST NOT make the canonical project invalid.
Viewer, transforms and visual composition
The Viewer doubles as an interactive composition canvas. Users can directly inspect and edit position, scale, rotation, anchor/pivot, crop, opacity, masks, alignment/guides, text bounds and compatible shape/path properties.
Transform and visual-property edits MUST be represented by canonical property mutations. Source pixels/frames remain unchanged unless the user explicitly performs a destructive source-operation workflow outside normal Motion project editing.
Motion MUST support layered compositing with opacity, blend modes, alpha, masks, mattes, track mattes, chroma/luma keying, nesting/precomposition, adjustment layers and explicit compositing order where supported.
Animation and keyframes
Suitable numeric, vector, colour, mask, effect, text and generated-component properties MUST be animatable through a common parameter-animation system rather than each feature inventing incompatible keyframe storage.
Keyframes have stable identity and support create, move, copy, duplicate, delete and value editing. Supported interpolation includes at least hold/step, linear and smooth/eased interpolation, with Bézier/value curves where meaningful. Motion MUST provide easing presets and a graph/curve editor for advanced editing.
Shared Present animation/timing primitives SHOULD be reused when semantics are compatible, while Motion remains authoritative for timeline/frame-based video state.
Advanced node editor
Motion MUST include a full visual node editor for advanced compositing, effects, transitions, motion graphics and procedural animation. It reuses the shared 9to1 Node Graph Framework for GraphID/NodeID/PortID identity, pan/zoom, selection, grouping, comments, typed ports, connection validation, copy/paste/duplicate, undo/redo, graph revisioning, AI graph mutation and execution-state visualisation.
Motion registers a rich Motion-specific node catalogue. Minimum families include media/sequence inputs, transform, crop, masks/mattes, compositing/blending, chroma/luma keying, colour processing, blur/sharpen, distortion/displacement, tracking data, procedural shapes, text/title generation, time offsets, retiming, parameter maths, curves, interpolation/easing, switching/conditions, generators and compatible particle/procedural systems where implemented.
Node graphs are structured project state. Branching graphs MUST NOT require destructive intermediate renders merely because an operation is non-linear. Render/cache intermediates MAY be produced for performance, but graph topology, parameters and inputs remain canonical.
The normal Motion UI MUST remain usable without nodes. Common effects and animation can be edited directly. Where an advanced representation is appropriate, Open in Node Editor/Advanced exposes or creates the structured graph without silently replacing unrelated project state.
Motion graph types and reusable graph assets
Motion defines native reusable graph objects including MotionEffectGraph, MotionTransitionGraph, MotionAnimationGraph and MotionCompositionGraph. Each has stable identity, revision state, typed inputs/outputs, internal NodeGraph identity, exposed user parameters and provenance/origin metadata where applicable.
Graphs may be embedded in one project or saved as reusable presets/components. Shared-definition instances MUST have explicit semantics for edit-this-instance, detach/copy or update-shared-definition; editing one instance MUST NOT unexpectedly rewrite every use.
Registered custom node types MAY be supplied through the broader 9to1 extension system subject to capability, trust and permission rules. First- or third-party node providers MUST participate in typed graph contracts rather than injecting arbitrary UI-only behaviour.
Custom transitions
Transitions MUST support ordinary built-in transitions and reusable MotionTransitionGraph assets. A custom transition graph receives at least outgoing visual input, incoming visual input, normalised transition progress from 0 to 1, frame/time context, sequence dimensions and any declared exposed parameters.
Transition graphs can therefore implement animated masks, zoom/whip transitions, blur, displacement, glitch/RGB treatments, procedural reveals and other advanced effects. The resulting transition remains editable and reusable rather than being permanently rendered into replacement clips.
Transition duration, alignment and exposed parameters remain ordinary structured timeline state and can be animated where compatible.
Procedural animation and property drivers
MotionAnimationGraph can drive compatible properties without baking every frame into ordinary keyframes. Minimum useful node families include constants, vectors, arithmetic, clamp, map/remap range, curves, noise, oscillators, frame/time, velocity, distance, interpolation, easing, deterministic seeded random, tracking data, audio amplitude/frequency analysis and safe formula/expression nodes where supported.
Keyframes, procedural graphs, tracking and linked values MUST interoperate through one canonical parameter-source model. A property can have a base/static value, keyframed value, procedural contribution and/or tracked/linked contribution only where the combination semantics are explicitly defined. The Inspector MUST make it clear what currently drives a property.
Example: a title may follow tracked subject position, retain hand-authored keyframed movement and add a small procedural noise offset without baking thousands of frame values.
Masks, tracking and rotoscoping
Masks are native editable objects supporting compatible path geometry, feather, opacity, expansion and animation. Manual drawing/path editing SHOULD reuse shared Picture/Rnote-derived primitives where semantics match.
Motion SHOULD support point, planar, subject or object tracking according to configured backends. Tracking data is structured and may drive transforms, masks, effects, text or procedural graphs.
Model-assisted subject/object segmentation and rotoscoping MAY initialise or update masks, but users MUST be able to inspect and correct results. Frame-by-frame/manual correction remains possible. Tracking or segmentation MUST NOT silently destroy source media.
Colour pipeline
Motion MUST include first-party colour correction/grading suitable for normal production. Minimum controls include exposure, contrast, highlights/shadows, temperature/tint, saturation and curves, plus channel/colour-wheel or equivalent advanced controls where implemented.
LUT import/use, histograms/scopes and per-clip or adjustment-layer grading SHOULD be supported where the backend permits. Sequence/project colour-space state MUST explicitly represent SDR/HDR and managed-colour configuration where supported rather than relying on hidden backend defaults.
Effects, titles and graphics
Effects are structured EffectInstance objects with stable identity, provider/type identity, ordered placement, parameters, bypass state and animation references. Core families include colour, blur/sharpen, transform, keying, distortion, stylisation and utility effects. Effect stacks remain reorderable, bypassable, editable and removable.
Titles and graphics MUST remain native structured objects rather than pre-rendered video. Text/title state includes text content, font/style, paragraph/layout, fills/strokes, backgrounds, transforms, shapes/images, effects and compatible animation.
Lower thirds, callouts, captions and reusable title compositions can therefore remain editable. Complex title/graphic systems MAY use Motion node graphs while retaining the same canonical object identity.
Captions and transcript-based editing
Motion MUST support time-aligned transcription and first-class CaptionTrack/CaptionCue objects. Capabilities include transcript correction, generated captions, editable cue timing/text, split/merge, styling, multiple caption tracks/languages where supported and import/export of maintained subtitle formats such as SRT/WebVTT.
Export MUST support appropriate sidecar, embedded and burned-in caption output according to chosen container/backend capability.
Transcript-based edits such as deleting a spoken phrase or removing long pauses MUST translate into ordinary native timeline edits after preview/validation. Transcript state is a semantic editing view over the canonical timeline, not a parallel hidden authority.
Audio and Wave interoperability
Motion audio tracks/clips use compatible Wave/shared-media primitives. Motion directly exposes normal video-production audio controls such as gain/volume, pan, fades, waveform display, effects, normalisation, automation and applicable dialogue cleanup.
Where supported, Motion can invoke the shared Enhance Audio, Denoise, Custom Censorship and Split Stems capabilities defined by Wave/shared media without creating incompatible private versions.
Open/Edit in Wave MUST preserve canonical asset/clip/timing references so advanced audio work can return to Motion without a lossy export-edit-import cycle. Wave remains the full audio-production surface; Motion provides the subset appropriate to video workflows.
AI-assisted editing
Dulche operates Motion through typed Motion/shared-engine actions and NodeGraph actions, never by pretending to drag timeline or canvas UI when semantic actions exist.
Examples: 'remove long pauses' performs transcript/time analysis and native ripple edits; 'make this vertical for a short' creates or adapts an appropriate sequence and uses structured reframing/crop/tracking; 'add animated subtitles' creates caption/title objects and animation; 'make this shot warmer' changes colour parameters; 'create a 30-second highlight reel' creates a new sequence referencing selected source ranges.
AI-generated edits MUST remain inspectable, undoable/revisioned project state. AI MUST NOT render an opaque replacement video and declare the structured editing task complete when Motion can represent the requested result natively.
Generative and model-backed video workflows
Subject to installed/configured provider capability, Motion MAY provide video generation, image-to-video, generated B-roll, object/background removal, semantic segmentation, smart reframing, scene/shot detection, motion/subject tracking, video restoration/denoise, enhancement/upscaling, frame interpolation, slow-motion generation, generative fill, temporal inpainting and frame/outpainting/extension.
When a generated result can be represented as editable native Motion structure, that representation remains canonical. When the model inherently returns raster/video frames that cannot reasonably be decomposed into lower-level Motion objects, Motion may create a GeneratedVideoAsset with stable identity, model/provider provenance, generation parameters, source references and revision metadata.
Native-generation rules MUST NOT be misinterpreted as requiring generated video pixels to be decomposed into fake editable vectors. The requirement is to preserve genuine structure where it exists and preserve provenance/editability around sampled/generated media where it does not.
Media analysis and indexing
Motion MAY maintain source/revision-aware analysis metadata for cuts/scenes, transcript/speech, silence, audio peaks, motion, tracked subjects/objects, semantic tags and other useful signals supported by configured analysis backends.
Analysis results are cacheable derived metadata tied to source identity/revision. Unchanged media SHOULD NOT be repeatedly reanalysed merely because a project was reopened. Stale analysis is invalidated or refreshed explicitly when its source assumptions change.
Files, asset identity and offline media
Files remains authoritative for source/export asset storage identity, move/rename/delete/recover/share and cloud/provider hydration. Motion projects reference stable FileID/AssetID identities rather than absolute paths.
Moving or renaming an underlying File MUST NOT detach a Motion reference. Unavailable source enters an explicit offline-media state and retains timeline/project identity. Relink resolves the existing reference rather than silently creating a new unrelated element.
Generated, proxy, cache and rendered assets MUST be distinguishable from canonical source identity and carry appropriate provenance/derivation metadata.
Import, export and render queue
Motion import MUST support maintained video, image and audio formats exposed by the approved shared media backend. GStreamer/GStreamer Editing Services or an explicitly documented equivalent production-capable backend is approved for decode/encode/playback/timeline primitives. Backend-specific IDs MUST NOT leak into the canonical public Motion project contract.
Export MUST support sequence/project render, selected range, frame stills, audio-only output, caption/subtitle output and appropriate individual-clip/component exports. Options include maintained container/codec choices, resolution, frame rate, quality/bitrate, audio codec/rate/channels, hardware encoder selection or automatic acceleration and SDR/HDR/colour-space options where supported.
Motion MUST provide a render queue/background-job model with stable job identity, progress, cancellation, typed failure state and safe retry. Export/render MUST be pinned to the intended project/source revision and MUST NOT silently switch to newly edited state mid-job.
Persistent AI bar
Motion hosts the global persistent Dulche AI bar. Semantic context includes ProjectID, SequenceID, selected TrackIDs/ElementIDs/GraphIDs, selected timeline range, playhead, viewer selection, masks/effects/keyframes, transcript/caption selection, source assets, colour state, analysis state and project revision.
Write-capable AI changes Motion only through typed Motion/shared-engine/NodeGraph actions and respects normal permission, trust, revision and undo/audit contracts.
Motion API
Motion's first-party API catalogue is exhaustive under the global API-parity rule. Minimum canonical entry points include:
9to1.Motion.CreateProject(config);
9to1.Motion.Open(projectOrFileID);
9to1.Motion.CreateSequence(projectID, config);
9to1.Motion.AddAsset(projectID, fileOrAssetID, options?);
9to1.Motion.AddTrack(sequenceID, type, config?);
9to1.Motion.AddElement(sequenceID, trackID, source, placement);
9to1.Motion.Insert(sequenceID, source, placement);
9to1.Motion.Overwrite(sequenceID, source, placement);
9to1.Motion.Split(sequenceID, elementID, time);
9to1.Motion.Trim(sequenceID, elementID, sourceRange);
9to1.Motion.RippleTrim(sequenceID, elementID, edge, time);
9to1.Motion.Roll(sequenceID, leftElementID, rightElementID, time);
9to1.Motion.Slip(sequenceID, elementID, sourceRange);
9to1.Motion.Slide(sequenceID, elementID, placement);
9to1.Motion.Move(sequenceID, elementID, placement);
9to1.Motion.Delete(sequenceID, target, mode?);
9to1.Motion.Nest(sequenceID, elementIDs, config?);
9to1.Motion.SetProperty(projectID, targetID, property, value);
9to1.Motion.AddEffect(projectID, targetID, effect, config?);
9to1.Motion.SetEffectParameter(projectID, effectID, parameter, value);
9to1.Motion.SetKeyframe(projectID, targetID, property, keyframe);
9to1.Motion.CreateMask(projectID, targetID, config);
9to1.Motion.UpdateMask(maskID, patch);
9to1.Motion.Track(projectID, target, mode, options?);
9to1.Motion.Transcribe(projectID, target, options?);
9to1.Motion.CreateCaptions(sequenceID, source, options?);
9to1.Motion.CreateGraph(projectID, graphType, config);
9to1.Motion.AssignGraph(projectID, targetID, graphID, slot?);
9to1.Motion.Generate(projectID, generationType, promptOrInputs, options?);
9to1.Motion.Render(projectID, target, options);
9to1.Motion.Export(projectID, target, format, options);
All node mutation uses the shared 9to1.NodeGraph.* contract where Node Graph Framework is canonical. Shared media, Files, Picture and other shared-domain operations SHOULD use the owning shared API namespace when that is canonical. First-party UI capabilities MUST NOT exist only as inaccessible private UI commands.
Automation and integration events
Automations, Spaces, Dulche and other authorised clients can use the exhaustive Motion action catalogue. Long proxy, analysis, tracking, generation, render and export jobs expose stable progress, cancellation, retry/idempotency where relevant and typed result/error state.
Motion emits meaningful typed events such as project/revision changed, source offline/relinked, analysis completed, proxy ready, tracking completed, render/export completed/failed and graph/generated-component changed. It MUST NOT flood Automations with raw frame, pointer or realtime preview events.
Collaboration and revision conflicts
Project/sequence/track/element/mask/effect/keyframe/graph/caption mutations are revision-aware. Independent object edits MAY merge when safe; incompatible concurrent edits to the same canonical object or property MUST surface conflict rather than blind last-write-wins.
Running proxy, tracking, generation, render and export jobs are pinned to their required source/project revisions. Their results MUST record which revision/input produced them.
Accessibility
Motion MUST be keyboard-operable for transport, timeline selection/editing, track controls, inspector properties, captions, keyframes, render jobs and graph editing. Pointer-only gestures cannot be the sole route for required editing operations.
Screen-reader users can inspect project/sequence/track/element identity, source/offline state, time positions, duration, transform/effect values, keyframes, captions, graph nodes/ports and render/job state. Visual states such as lock, disable, offline, clipping, selection and errors MUST NOT rely on colour alone.
Viewer/canvas operations that normally use direct manipulation MUST expose equivalent numeric/semantic controls.
Performance and realtime preview safety
Motion MUST decode/render frames on demand using bounded caches rather than loading entire long-form or high-resolution sources into memory. Thumbnail, waveform, proxy, analysis, tracking, generation and render work runs outside latency-sensitive interactive paths.
GPU acceleration and hardware decode/encode SHOULD be used where safe and available, with explicit capability fallback. 4K/8K and otherwise heavy media remain workable through proxies, reduced preview quality, caching and tiling according to available hardware rather than an architecture that assumes full-resolution residency.
Interactive editing MUST remain responsive while background jobs run. Preview quality MAY adapt under load, but canonical time/frame calculations and final requested render quality MUST remain deterministic and source-based.
Recovery and failure behaviour
Project saves/autosaves MUST be crash-safe and preserve canonical project integrity. A crash or termination during proxy generation, analysis, tracking, generation, render or export MUST leave the project valid and the derived job recoverable/retryable where feasible.
Partial derived output MUST NOT be reported as complete. Failures expose typed state such as ProjectNotFound, SequenceNotFound, ElementNotFound, AssetOffline, CodecUnsupported, ProxyFailed, AnalysisFailed, TrackingFailed, GraphInvalid, NodeUnavailable, GenerationFailed, RenderFailed, ExportFailed, RevisionConflict, PermissionDenied and CapabilityUnavailable plus shared backend/model errors.
Undo/redo and revision history MUST restore structured project changes without requiring source media to be rewritten.
Platform capability behaviour
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical Motion project/graph/generated-component model while capability-negotiating codecs, GPU/hardware acceleration, camera/device access, model availability and performance differences.
A platform may disable an unavailable codec, hardware encoder, node provider or model-backed feature with explicit CapabilityUnavailable state, but MUST NOT silently create an incompatible project schema.
When Home is absent at process start, Motion follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract rather than launching an incompatible private runtime.
Acceptance requirements
Motion is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
A multi-track project containing video, image, title and audio elements can be edited, closed/reopened and exported while preserving stable project/sequence/track/element identity.
Insert/overwrite, split, trim, ripple trim, roll, slip, slide, ripple delete, lift/extract, linking and nested-sequence operations produce deterministic structured timeline state and remain undoable.
Normal transforms, crop, masks, effects, colour and speed changes remain non-destructive and survive save/reopen.
Proxy editing retains canonical source identity and final export uses original source quality unless explicitly configured otherwise.
Keyframed animation persists stable property/keyframe state and the graph/curve editor reproduces the same rendered motion after reopen.
A MotionCompositionGraph can branch/composite multiple visual inputs without flattening the canonical graph; graph edits remain inspectable after restart.
A custom MotionTransitionGraph receives outgoing/incoming inputs and normalised progress, renders between clips and remains reusable/editable.
A MotionAnimationGraph can procedurally drive a property and can coexist with explicitly defined keyframe/tracking contributions without baking per-frame values.
Registered graph nodes enforce typed-port validation; an invalid connection is rejected without corrupting the graph.
Masking, chroma/luma keying, tracking and manual correction create inspectable editable state rather than rewriting source frames.
Titles/text remain editable native objects after animation/effects and do not require pre-rendering for ordinary editing.
Transcript/caption workflows create first-class timed caption state; transcript-based deletion maps to ordinary timeline edits; maintained subtitle import/export round-trips representative content.
Motion and Wave share compatible audio identity so advanced Wave editing returns to the same Motion audio reference without an unnecessary export/import duplicate.
Shared Enhance Audio, Denoise, Custom Censorship and Split Stems can be invoked from Motion where capability is available without creating an incompatible private audio model.
AI editing examples such as pause removal, vertical reframing, animated subtitles and highlight-sequence creation execute through typed Motion actions and leave inspectable native state.
Generated video that cannot be represented structurally is stored as a provenance-bearing GeneratedVideoAsset rather than misrepresented as a fully editable native composition.
Offline source media preserves timeline/project identity and relink restores the existing reference.
Render queue jobs expose progress/cancellation/failure and remain pinned to the intended project revision; interrupted derived jobs do not corrupt the project.
Large/high-resolution projects remain responsive through proxies, bounded caches, background analysis and adaptive preview rather than full-media RAM loading.
Keyboard and assistive-technology paths can perform required timeline, property, caption, graph and render-queue operations without pointer-only dependency.
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical project model while capability-negotiating backend/hardware/model differences.
When Home is absent at process start, Motion follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract.
Data Apps
Data
Product role and data paradigms
9-1 Data is the native CUI spreadsheet, structured-data, relational-database, SQL-query and analytical workspace. It combines conventional spreadsheet work, rich structured cells, relational modelling, multidimensional analytical data, charts/pivots, data transformation, database exploration and AI-assisted analysis in one coherent product.
Data MUST support four native data paradigms without forcing one paradigm onto every project: spreadsheet/grid data, relational database data, hierarchical/rich structured data and multidimensional analytical data. These paradigms may interoperate through explicit projections, relationships and transformations, but their semantics MUST NOT be silently conflated.
The ordinary spreadsheet remains the approachable default. Advanced relational, nested, multidimensional and query capabilities appear when the data or user workflow requires them. Native .9to1d projects MAY represent richer structures than XLSX/ODS; compatibility formats MUST NOT constrain the native model.
Shared engines, donor source and implementation authority
LibreOffice Calc is the spreadsheet-compatibility/donor engine for established spreadsheet behaviour, formula compatibility and XLSX/ODS interoperability. DuckDB is the local analytical SQL engine for local tables, files, queries and relational projections. Configured providers MAY add PostgreSQL, MySQL/MariaDB, SQLite, SQL Server and other supported external database systems through typed connection adapters.
The 9to1 source tree MUST contain or fetch the appropriate maintained LibreOffice Calc donor source required by the architecture, subject to the global donor-source and licensing contract. The implementation agent MUST NOT treat a missing LibreOffice installation or missing checked-out donor source as permission to build a miniature replacement spreadsheet engine. If the required donor source is absent during an autonomous development pass, the agent MUST obtain/fork the latest appropriate compatible source and record the exact upstream/version used before continuing dependent implementation.
Data MUST integrate donor capability into the 9to1 product model, CUI and typed APIs. Merely shelling out to soffice as an opaque external black box while leaving the canonical Data experience or API surface incomplete does not satisfy the implementation requirement.
Shared charting, Node Graph, Files, identity/permissions, credential storage, AI/model, action/audit and other cross-product infrastructure MUST be reused where canonical rather than privately reimplemented.
Canonical Data project model
DataProject has stable ProjectID, Workbooks[], DataSources[], Connections[], SavedQueries[], DataModels[], TransformPipelines[], DataCubes[], Visualisations[], Charts[], PivotModels[], project settings, CreatedAt, ModifiedAt and Revision.
A project MAY contain only a workbook, only database/query resources, only a multidimensional model, or any compatible combination. A user MUST NOT need to create unrelated projects merely because one analysis starts in a spreadsheet and later uses SQL or a transformation pipeline.
Data resources reference stable identities rather than UI coordinates wherever the resource has independent semantic identity. Ordinary A1/R1C1-style references remain available for spreadsheet compatibility, but tables, records, queries, charts, pivots, connections, relationships, visualisations and pipelines have stable IDs.
Workbook and spreadsheet model
Workbook has stable WorkbookID, Sheets[], workbook names/named ranges, calculation settings, external/link metadata, compatibility metadata and Revision.
Sheet has stable SheetID, ordered rows/columns/cells, tables, drawings/charts where applicable, filters, freeze state, view state and Revision. Reordering or renaming a sheet MUST NOT invalidate stable references that use SheetID.
Cells support ordinary scalar values, formulas, formatting, validation, comments/notes, hyperlinks/references and compatible Calc spreadsheet features. Grid coordinates identify a location in a sheet; they are not the sole identity mechanism for richer Data objects.
Normal spreadsheet workflows include direct cell/formula-bar editing, fill/copy, pattern autofill, insert/delete rows and columns, row/column resize/hide/freeze, multi-range selection, find/replace, sort/filter, named ranges, tables, validation/dropdowns, conditional formatting, comments/notes, sheet management, protection where compatible and undo/redo.
Rich native cells and multiple values
A native .9to1d cell MAY contain a typed value object rather than only one scalar. Supported native value families include scalar number/text/boolean/date/time/duration, formula, list/array, set/tags, record/key-value object, nested table, canonical 9to1 object reference, query-backed value, calculated structured value and other explicitly registered structured types.
Multiple values in one cell are first-class typed members, not comma-separated text. A list/set/record cell can expose member ordering, labels/keys, type validation, per-member editing, filtering/query semantics and explicit expansion into rows/columns when required.
The grid MAY display a concise collapsed summary such as '3 values' or '5 related records'; selecting or expanding the cell exposes the complete structured value without altering the underlying schema.
Formula, filter, Visualise and SQL-projection semantics for structured cells MUST be defined explicitly. Unsupported operations produce typed errors or require an explicit projection/flattening step rather than silently stringifying complex values.
Nested cells, nested tables and hierarchical data
A cell MAY own a nested table/record structure with stable nested identity and schema. Nested data is not represented as an untyped blob. Data supports drill-down, expand/collapse and focused child-table editing so hierarchical information can be represented without forcing every child structure onto a separate top-level sheet.
Data MUST distinguish nested owned data from references to separate related records. A nested child table is part of the parent value/object lifecycle; a relation/reference points to independently canonical records and MUST NOT duplicate them merely for display.
Hierarchical structures MAY nest beyond one level when the schema requires it, subject to performance and usability limits. The UI MUST avoid expanding an entire deep hierarchy by default.
Multidimensional and 3D analytical data
Data MUST support native multidimensional datasets beyond a two-dimensional row-by-column grid. A DataCube has stable CubeID, Dimensions[], Measures[], DimensionMembers/hierarchies, fact/cell storage or query definition, calculated measures, source/provenance and Revision.
A common three-dimensional example is Product × Region × Month, but the model MUST support additional dimensions such as Scenario, Currency or Channel. The UI presents manageable two-dimensional slices, pivots, comparisons and Visualise views rather than attempting to render arbitrary high-dimensional data literally.
Users can switch or compare dimension members, for example Month=January versus Month=February, without duplicating twelve nearly identical sheets. Multidimensional state remains canonical and may be queried through explicit relational projections/views.
DataCube projections to spreadsheet, SQL, pivot or Visualise views MUST preserve source identity and declare the projection rules.
Multiple views over one canonical dataset
The same canonical dataset MAY be viewed as an ordinary spreadsheet grid, structured/nested table, relational table, pivot, hierarchy/tree, multidimensional slice, SQL relation, transformation graph or Visualise view. These are views/projections of the same data where possible, not independent copied datasets.
Creating a new view MUST NOT silently duplicate source data unless the user explicitly requests a snapshot/materialised copy. Edits through a writable view update the same canonical object subject to that view's mapping and permissions.
Formula engine and calculation
Data MUST preserve Calc-compatible formula semantics wherever spreadsheet compatibility is claimed. Supported families include arithmetic, logical, text, date/time, lookup/reference, statistical, financial, array/dynamic-array behaviour where supported and error-handling functions.
Formula dependencies MUST be tracked so recalculation can be dependency-aware. Data MUST NOT blindly recalculate an entire large workbook after every unrelated edit when a narrower dependency recomputation is possible.
Formula errors remain typed and inspectable, including divide-by-zero, invalid/missing references, type mismatch, circular dependency and backend/function availability errors. Data MUST NOT collapse distinct formula failures into a generic error string.
Structured/native cell values may expose additional functions for contains/count/map/filter/member access and projection where explicitly supported; compatibility exports must detect when such formulas cannot be represented faithfully.
Tables, records and stable row identity
Structured DataTable objects are first-class rather than merely formatted ranges. A DataTable has stable TableID, schema/header metadata, Records[], filters/sorts, source/query relationship, constraints and Revision.
Database-mode rows are Records with stable RecordID. Sorting, filtering or moving a visible row MUST NOT change the record's identity. Relationships and AI/Automation references target stable record/key identity rather than 'whatever is currently on row 37'.
A SQL result may materialise into or back a query-linked DataTable. Conversely, eligible DataTables can be exposed to DuckDB as relations without exporting them first.
Relational schema and field design
Any eligible DataTable may be promoted/configured as a relational table with explicit field/schema metadata. Fields support name, data type, nullability/required state, default, validation/check rules, uniqueness, generated/computed definition, key role, references and backend-specific metadata where applicable.
Native field types include integer, decimal, currency, text, boolean, date/time, duration, enum/category, UUID/ID, reference, list/set, record/object, nested table and calculated/computed types. External database tables restrict available types and constraints to the connected backend's declared capability.
Data MUST provide a Table Design/Schema view where field definitions, keys, required state, defaults, references and constraints can be inspected and edited directly without relying on scattered context menus.
Primary keys, candidate keys and indexes
Relational tables support single-column and composite primary keys, candidate/unique keys, generated IDs and UUID-style stable keys. Primary-key changes MUST validate duplicates, missing values and dependent references before commitment.
Indexes are explicit schema metadata where the backend supports them, including primary/unique, ordinary and compound indexes. Data SHOULD explain index capability and likely purpose without automatically creating indexes everywhere.
Project-local structured tables MAY use stable RecordID independently of a user-visible relational primary key; external relational projection semantics MUST define which key is authoritative for joins and persistence.
Foreign keys and sheet/table relationships
Data supports explicit relationships between tables/sheets through foreign-key/reference objects rather than requiring VLOOKUP/XLOOKUP-style formulas to express every data relationship.
Relationship types include one-to-one, one-to-many and many-to-many through a junction/association table. A relationship has stable RelationshipID, source table/fields, target table/key, cardinality, optionality, referential action rules and Revision.
Example: Students.TutorID → Tutors.TutorID. The UI may display a friendly related value such as tutor name while storing the stable referenced key/record. Selecting such a reference can offer Open related record without duplicating the target record.
Relationship designer and ER diagrams
Data MUST provide a visual Relationship Designer showing tables/entities, key fields and typed relationship edges with cardinality/optionality. Users can create, inspect, edit and delete relationships and can generate a junction table for a many-to-many relationship.
The Relationship Designer SHOULD reuse the shared Node Graph Framework for pan/zoom/selection/grouping/connection mechanics while preserving Data-specific relationship semantics and constraints.
Data can generate an entity-relationship diagram showing entities/tables, fields, primary keys, foreign keys, cardinality, optionality and junction tables. The ER diagram is a Visualise/data-model representation, not a second independent schema.
Referential integrity and cascade behaviour
Relationships may enforce referenced-key existence, restrict deletion/update, cascade delete/update or set-null according to backend/native capability. Consequential cascade operations MUST be previewable with affected-object/record impact where knowable.
If a relationship prevents deletion, Data MUST expose which dependency blocks the operation. It MUST NOT silently disable referential integrity or orphan dependent records.
A large cascade such as deleting one parent that affects thousands of dependent records requires an explicit impact surface before execution in manual protected workflows and always in AI-originated mutation workflows.
Normalisation and denormalisation
Data MUST include a Normalise tool that analyses selected relational/tabular structures for common design problems such as repeating groups, duplicated entities, non-atomic values where a relational design is desired, partial dependencies, transitive dependencies, duplicated lookup data and missing candidate keys.
Normalisation assistance may propose transformations toward 1NF, 2NF, 3NF and, where appropriate for advanced users, BCNF. The proposal MUST show new tables, keys, relationships and record-migration effects before mutation. Data MUST explain assumptions rather than blindly applying a theoretical normal form to data that is intentionally hierarchical or multidimensional.
Data also supports explicit Flatten/Denormalise transformations for analytics/export. Normalisation and denormalisation are controlled structured transformations, not destructive reinterpretations.
Lookups and related-record navigation
A foreign-key/reference field may display a user-friendly target field while retaining the stable referenced key/record internally. Lookup display configuration MUST NOT replace the actual stored relationship.
One-to-many relationships can expose related-record counts or expandable related-record views. Such displays reference canonical records; they MUST NOT copy the children into a nested owned structure unless the user explicitly converts the relationship.
Data sources and connections
Data distinguishes static/imported data, linked files, project-local queryable data and external/live connections. Static/imported sources include declared CSV/TSV/JSON where supported and spreadsheet formats. Local query sources include DuckDB-accessible tables/files such as CSV/Parquet where supported. External/live connections use typed provider adapters.
DataSource and Connection objects have stable identity, provider/dialect, scope, capability metadata, source schema/version information where available and refresh state. Credentials/secrets MUST use the 9to1 credential/trust infrastructure and MUST NOT be embedded in .9to1d project content, query history or ordinary logs.
Connection capability negotiation defines supported transactions, snapshots/checkpoints, schema introspection, DDL/DML features, explain plans, cancellation and backup/recovery options.
SQL workspace
Data MUST provide native SQL authoring/execution with syntax highlighting, dialect-aware parsing/validation, schema/object browser, table/column/function completion, relationship-aware join suggestions, query formatting, parameters where supported, saved queries, query history, execution timing/statistics, cancellation, paged/virtualised result sets, EXPLAIN/plan access where supported and result export/materialisation.
DuckDB SHOULD make local analytical querying nearly frictionless: eligible project tables and supported local files can be queried directly without requiring users to provision an external database.
SQL results can be inspected, opened in Visualise, saved as a query, materialised to a sheet/table, exported or used as downstream transformation input.
Persistent AI / SQL bar switcher
In Data, the persistent floating input bar contains an explicit mode switcher between AI and SQL. AI mode routes natural-language requests through Dulche and typed Data actions. SQL mode treats the input as SQL and executes it natively against the explicitly selected SQL target; SQL text MUST NOT be sent to AI merely to emulate execution.
SQL mode MUST always display the active execution target, for example DuckDB · This Project or PostgreSQL · Production. The selected connection/database/schema scope MUST be visible enough that users cannot reasonably confuse a local analytical target with a live external target.
Changing the SQL execution target is explicit. Data MUST NOT silently retarget a query because another sheet, panel or connection became focused.
Native SQL execution records and results
Every execution creates a canonical SqlExecution record with stable ExecutionID, ConnectionID/target, dialect, statements, classification, ReadOnly state, initiator, start/completion state, result sets, affected objects/rows where known, recovery strategy/reference where applicable, transaction/savepoint metadata, outcome/error and audit reference.
SQL result sets preserve typed columns and support virtualised/paged browsing. Successful prior result state MUST remain available when a later execution fails unless the user explicitly replaces/discards it.
Query history records target, dialect, classification, result metadata and outcome without storing secrets. SavedQuery objects are persistent editable query resources with stable identity.
Read-only and mutating SQL classification
Data MUST parse/classify SQL before execution. Provably read-only statements such as ordinary SELECT/CTE SELECT, EXPLAIN and supported metadata introspection MAY execute directly subject to connection permissions.
Potentially mutating or schema-changing SQL includes INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, MERGE, CREATE, ALTER, DROP, TRUNCATE and provider-specific mutation commands. Classification MUST be conservative when the dialect/parser cannot prove a statement is read-only.
Multi-statement input is treated as one explicit execution plan with per-statement classification and declared atomicity/partial-execution risk.
Protected live-database SQL execution
Consequential SQL against an external/live database enters the protected execution path. Before execution Data MUST identify the target, classify statements, inspect likely affected objects, use a transaction/savepoint where supported, determine preview/impact information where technically possible, establish an appropriate recoverable backup/checkpoint strategy when required, show the effect/recovery state and obtain the applicable confirmation.
Recovery strategy is backend-aware and may use transaction rollback, savepoint, affected-row before-image capture, table snapshot/copy, database-native snapshot, backup file/provider recovery point, schema export plus affected data or another verified recoverable mechanism. Data MUST record the strategy actually established.
If the safety contract for the requested live mutation requires rollback/backup protection and Data cannot establish it, execution MUST stop. Data MUST NOT state or imply that a backup, transaction or rollback exists when it does not.
After execution Data verifies the actual outcome where feasible, records audit/recovery information and truthfully reports partial success/failure. It MUST NOT blindly retry consequential SQL without operation identity/idempotency or renewed confirmation where required.
DDL and dependency impact
Schema-changing SQL receives dependency-aware analysis where metadata is available. Before consequential DROP/ALTER/rename operations Data SHOULD identify dependent views, foreign keys, indexes, saved queries, linked Data views, Forms integrations, Visualisations and other known references.
DDL impact that cannot be determined reliably MUST be represented as unknown rather than assumed safe.
Manual SQL versus AI-proposed SQL
Direct SQL typed and executed by the user remains native SQL interaction and is not treated as an AI mutation merely because it is entered in the shared bar. Read-only SQL should not acquire unnecessary AI-style approval friction.
AI may draft, explain, optimise, fix or generate SQL, but an AI-proposed consequential mutation MUST NOT bypass Data's per-action approval rules. For external database changes, the proposed SQL and target/impact/recovery information MUST be inspectable before approved execution.
If AI decides SQL is the best implementation of a Data task, the generated SQL remains visible/inspectable and execution occurs through the same SQL safety pipeline rather than an opaque hidden database mutation.
Visual query builder
Data SHOULD provide a no-code/low-code visual query builder for select fields, filters, joins, groups, aggregations, ordering and limits. It produces an inspectable structured query/SQL representation rather than a second incompatible query engine.
Declared relationships SHOULD inform join suggestions. Users can switch to or edit equivalent SQL where the backend/query can be represented faithfully.
Transformation pipelines
Data MUST support reusable structured TransformPipeline objects for data cleaning and reshaping. Core step families include type conversion, rename, split/merge, text cleaning, filter, replace, derive column, group/aggregate, sort, join, union/append, pivot/unpivot, deduplicate, fill missing values, date parsing and supported custom expressions.
Pipelines retain ordered step identity, source mappings, schema expectations, outputs, provenance and Revision. They are rerunnable against refreshed source data so recurring imports do not require repeating manual cleanup.
For complex branching/dependencies, Data provides an advanced transformation graph using the shared Node Graph Framework. Nodes may represent Source → Select → Filter → Join → Derive → Group → Output and other registered transforms. The step-list/table workflow and graph are representations of the same canonical pipeline where compatible.
Refresh and stale-data semantics
Linked/query-backed resources record source identity, last successful refresh, current source version/revision where knowable, stale state, refresh policy and downstream dependencies.
Refresh failure MUST NOT erase the previous valid result. The previous result remains available with explicit stale/error state unless the user explicitly discards it.
Automatic refresh is permission- and resource-aware; external consequential side effects MUST NOT be hidden inside a data-refresh operation.
Visualise mode from the persistent eye icon
The persistent floating toolbar's eye icon exposes alternative views of the current artifact. In Data, Eye → Visualise opens an interactive graphical analytical representation over selected ranges/tables, the active sheet or another explicit Data source without modifying the underlying workbook.
Visualise is distinct from inserting a chart into a sheet. Inserted charts are persistent workbook objects. Visualise is an adaptive analytical lens over canonical data. A useful Visualise configuration MAY be saved as a DataVisualisation, embedded elsewhere or converted to a persistent chart/view where the representation supports it.
Opening/changing Visualise MUST NOT require restructuring or duplicating the underlying spreadsheet.
Adaptive visualisation inference
Visualise inspects headers, types, ordering, table orientation and semantic structure to determine suitable graphical representations. It considers numeric versus categorical fields, dates/time, ordinal/ranked fields, probabilities, names/entities, groups, repeated measurements, paired numeric variables, distributions and declared dimensions/relationships.
Data SHOULD rank sensible visualisations for the current structure instead of presenting every visual type as equally appropriate. Examples include category+value → bar/column; two numeric variables → scatter; numeric distribution → histogram/box/stem-and-leaf; time-indexed values → line/time-series; ranked outcomes → tier list; probability/distribution data → probability cloud; paired/ordered comparisons → alignment chart.
Automatic inference is always inspectable and overrideable. The user can explicitly map roles such as X/category, Y/value, series, group, label, size, rank/tier criterion, time, probability and comparison source.
Visualisation catalogue and specialised views
Visualise supports at least bar/column, stacked/grouped bar, line, area, scatter, histogram, box-and-whisker, stem-and-leaf, probability/distribution cloud, tier list, alignment chart, heatmap, pie/donut where mathematically appropriate, density/distribution views where supported and other registered visualisations whose input requirements match the selected data.
A tier-list view can map entity, ranking field, tier boundaries/order, secondary labels and optional group. Tiers may derive from explicit categories or user-defined numeric/rule boundaries. The tier rules MUST be visible/editable rather than inferred invisibly.
An alignment chart represents comparable ordered positions/values from two or more sources/groups with explicit mappings. Specialised views MUST define their required field roles and accessible non-visual representation.
Multi-sheet and multi-source Visualise comparison
Within Visualise, users can Add data → Sheet and add ranges/tables from additional sheets in the same workbook for comparison. Each source retains WorkbookID, SheetID and Range/TableID identity rather than copying values into an anonymous temporary dataset.
Data can suggest field mappings across differently arranged sheets using headers, types and semantic similarity, but users can inspect/change mappings. Example: 2025 Results.Score ↔ 2026 Results.Score even when the physical column locations differ.
Saved visualisations refresh from their live canonical sources when those sources change, subject to refresh/version rules.
Visualise interaction, saved objects and cross-app reuse
Visualise views support appropriate selection, filtering, series isolation, sorting, zoom/pan where useful, exact-value inspection, mapping changes and type changes without losing source identity. Selecting a graphical mark SHOULD map back to the corresponding row/cell/record and offer Go to source where possible.
DataVisualisation has stable VisualisationID, Type, Sources[], FieldMappings, Filters, Grouping, Sorting, VisualSettings, ComparisonConfiguration, interaction/presentation state where appropriate and Revision.
Write, Present, Home and other authorised surfaces can embed/reference saved Data visualisations as semantic/live objects rather than requiring screenshots, preserving accessibility labels, source relationships and refresh semantics.
Charts, pivots and analytical sheets
Data includes persistent chart objects bound to ranges/tables/query results with editable series, axes, labels, legends, titles, source mappings and formatting. Common analytical chart families are available through the donor/shared chart engine and update as source data changes.
PivotModel/PivotTable objects support row, column, value and filter fields, aggregation choice, sorting, grouping where supported and refresh. Pivot configuration/source identity remains canonical rather than being pasted as static values.
Data MAY provide analytical/report sheets that compose tables, pivots, charts, metrics and controls. Persistent cross-9to1 dashboards remain owned by Home; Home can reference selected Data visualisations/metrics instead of Data becoming a duplicate dashboard product.
Cross-app conversion into Data
Data MUST support AI-assisted conversion of structured content from other 9to1 surfaces into native Data structures. The preferred source is the source app's canonical semantic objects, not screenshots/OCR, whenever typed structure is available.
Import/Convert to Data can accept compatible Write, Present, Canvas, Boards, Forms, Spaces and other registered 9to1 artifacts. Dulche analyses repeated structures, fields, lists, tables, objects, connections and metadata and proposes an explicit target schema/mapping before materialisation when the conversion is not deterministic.
Conversion MUST preserve source provenance and provide Go to source where source identity is retained.
Write, Present, Boards and Canvas conversion semantics
Write → Data can recognise native tables, headings, repeated document sections, lists, key/value blocks, dates, people and canonical references. Repeated sections may become records; list fields can become true multi-value cells rather than comma-separated text.
Present → Data can map one slide to one record, repeated cards/objects to rows, native tables to Data tables, chart data to result/source tables where available, speaker notes to optional fields and slide metadata to columns. Repeated layout semantics SHOULD inform schema inference.
Boards → Data can map cards to records, columns/groups to categorical fields, labels to multi-value fields, assignees to person references, due dates to dates, checklists to nested tables/lists and linked objects to canonical references.
Canvas → Data can map nodes/cards to records, groups/frames to categories and connections to a relationship/edge table. Connected diagrams SHOULD be represented as appropriate node and edge datasets rather than flattened nonsensically into one sheet.
Snapshot versus linked conversion
Cross-app conversion supports Snapshot and Linked modes. Snapshot creates independent Data content from the current source state. Linked conversion retains canonical source/object references and a reusable mapping so refresh can import subsequent changes subject to conflict rules.
Linked mappings record source app/artifact/object IDs, conversion rules, last successful refresh, source revision where available, local-edit state and ambiguity/confidence metadata for AI-inferred mappings.
Refreshing a linked conversion MUST NOT silently discard incompatible local edits; conflicts or schema drift are surfaced.
Data profiling and quality inspection
For selected ranges/tables Data SHOULD provide profiling including row/record count, null/blank count, unique count, inferred/declared type, min/max, mean/median where suitable, value distribution, duplicate detection and invalid/outlier indicators where statistically appropriate.
Profiling distinguishes measured facts from heuristic anomaly suggestions. It MUST NOT label an observation erroneous merely because it is statistically unusual.
Files and source identity
Files remains authoritative for source/export file identity, move/rename/delete/recover/share and provider/cloud hydration. Linked data sources reference stable FileID/AssetID identity rather than absolute paths.
Imported file workflows distinguish embedded/copy, linked-source and query-backed semantics. Users can inspect whether changes to the source will affect Data and whether Data can refresh/write back.
Moving or renaming an underlying source in Files MUST NOT break a stable link when the provider identity remains valid.
Import/export and compatibility boundaries
Data supports native .9to1d plus declared XLSX, ODS, CSV and TSV import/export and other explicitly supported data formats. LibreOffice Calc compatibility paths are used for representative spreadsheet interoperability.
Native .9to1d features such as nested tables, list-valued cells, records/objects, canonical cross-app references, multidimensional cubes, rich relationships and linked-source mappings may exceed XLSX/ODS capability. Export MUST detect unsupported semantics and present explicit transformations such as expand list to rows/columns, stringify, move nested table to another sheet, flatten hierarchy or export a cube slice/pivot.
Data MUST NOT silently flatten rich native content and claim a lossless round-trip. Compatibility warnings identify structures/formulas/objects that will be flattened, materialised or omitted before export.
Forms and other 9to1 integrations
Data can create a Forms artifact from a relational/table schema rather than duplicating a full form builder. Field type, required state, enum/reference options and validation can seed the generated form. Submitted responses write through typed Data APIs subject to permissions and constraints.
Write/Present can embed live Data tables/charts/Visualisations; Forms responses can be analysed/queryable in Data; Automations can refresh/import/export/run permitted queries; Spaces can reference datasets/results; Home can surface selected metrics/visualisations.
Database/table record editing MAY provide a focused single-record editor, but general form-design capability remains owned by Forms.
AI context, provenance and analysis
Dulche Data context includes ProjectID, WorkbookID/SheetID, selected range/table/RecordIDs, formula dependencies, QueryID/result set, relational schema/relationships, DataCube dimensions/measures, chart/pivot/Visualisation, TransformPipeline, ConnectionID/target capability and project/source revisions.
AI analysis can explain trends, propose transformations, create charts/visualisations, repair formulas, design relational schema and draft SQL using typed context. Where a request mutates canonical Data state, the explicit Data mutation approval contract applies.
Users MUST be able to inspect value provenance where available: literal/formula/query/transform origin, source cell/table/query/pipeline, refresh status, external connection/source and whether AI modified the value/object.
AI mutation approval and live-database protection
Data inherits the shared floating AI-bar Read-only / Write-mode contract but deliberately narrows Write mode: every AI-requested Data mutation requires explicit approval for that specific action. Switching the AI bar to Write mode, trusting the Agent/app or previously approving another Data action MUST NOT authorise subsequent Data mutations automatically.
For workbook/local analytical changes, the approval surface MUST show the proposed operation/change set sufficiently for the user to understand what will change. For a connected live database, Data additionally shows meaningful SQL/action preview, target, affected objects/rows where knowable, schema/dependency/external-side-effect impact and the established recovery mechanism.
If required live-database rollback/backup protection cannot be established, the mutation MUST stop rather than falsely claim rollback protection.
After an approved live-database mutation, Data MUST verify the actual outcome where feasible, record the canonical Action Graph/audit result and preserve recovery references. Partial failure MUST be reported truthfully and MUST NOT trigger blind consequential retries.
Data API
Data's first-party API catalogue is exhaustive under the global API-parity rule. Minimum canonical entry points include:
9to1.Data.CreateProject(config);
9to1.Data.Open(projectOrFileID);
9to1.Data.CreateWorkbook(projectID, config?);
9to1.Data.AddSheet(workbookID, config?);
9to1.Data.SetRangeValues(sheetID, range, values, options?);
9to1.Data.SetFormula(sheetID, cellOrRange, formula);
9to1.Data.CreateTable(sheetID, rangeOrSchema, config?);
9to1.Data.SetTableSchema(tableID, schemaPatch);
9to1.Data.SetPrimaryKey(tableID, fields);
9to1.Data.CreateRelationship(projectID, config);
9to1.Data.UpdateRelationship(relationshipID, patch);
9to1.Data.Normalise(target, options?);
9to1.Data.Flatten(target, options?);
9to1.Data.CreateCube(projectID, config);
9to1.Data.CreateQuery(projectID, targetConnectionID, sql, options?);
9to1.Data.ExecuteSql(targetConnectionID, sql, options?);
9to1.Data.ExplainSql(targetConnectionID, sql, options?);
9to1.Data.CreateTransformPipeline(projectID, source, config?);
9to1.Data.AddTransformStep(pipelineID, step);
9to1.Data.Refresh(targetID, options?);
9to1.Data.CreateChart(source, config);
9to1.Data.CreatePivot(source, config);
9to1.Data.CreateVisualisation(sourceOrSources, config);
9to1.Data.UpdateVisualisation(visualisationID, patch);
9to1.Data.Profile(target, options?);
9to1.Data.ConvertFromArtifact(sourceArtifactID, mappingOrPrompt, options?);
9to1.Data.ConnectSource(provider, config);
9to1.Data.Export(target, format, options);
Transformation and relationship graph mutation uses 9to1.NodeGraph.* when the shared Node Graph Framework is canonical. Files, credential and other shared-domain operations use their owning shared API namespaces when canonical.
Automation and integration events
Automations, Spaces, Dulche and other authorised clients can use the exhaustive Data action catalogue subject to Data's mutation approval/security rules. Long imports, refreshes, profiling, transforms, SQL jobs and exports expose stable progress, cancellation and typed result/error state.
Data emits meaningful typed events such as project/revision changed, source stale/refreshed, schema changed, relationship changed, query completed/failed, SQL mutation completed/rolled back/partially failed, Visualisation changed and export completed. It MUST NOT flood Automations with raw per-cell hover/selection events.
Collaboration and revision conflicts
Workbook/sheet/table/record/formula/schema/relationship/query/pipeline/cube/Visualisation mutations are revision-aware. Independent edits MAY merge when safe; incompatible concurrent mutations to the same canonical object/property surface conflict rather than blind last-write-wins.
Running query/refresh/transform/export jobs are pinned to the intended source/project revisions where applicable. Results record which inputs/revisions produced them.
Accessibility
Data MUST be keyboard-operable for spreadsheet navigation/editing, formula entry, tables, relational design, SQL authoring/execution, query results, Visualise controls, charts/pivots and transformation/relationship graphs.
Screen-reader users can inspect cell coordinates and semantic type/value, structured-cell members, table/field/key identity, relationships, query target/result columns, chart/Visualise equivalents, refresh state and errors.
Every graphical Visualise representation MUST expose a meaningful non-visual equivalent: for example scatter points as an accessible point table, box plots as quartile/statistical values, tier lists as ordered tier/entity lists, and stem-and-leaf as structured textual data. State MUST NOT rely on colour alone.
Performance and large-data behaviour
Spreadsheet UI MUST virtualise cells/rows/columns so only required visible/nearby content is rendered. Large imports/query results use streaming/paging/chunking and background jobs rather than freezing the UI or loading every result row into presentation memory.
Formula calculation is dependency-aware; chart/pivot/Visualise recomputation and profiling run incrementally/background where appropriate. Large source files/tables/cubes use bounded caches and query pushdown/column pruning where the backend supports it.
AI context MUST be scoped semantically to relevant ranges, tables, schema, query results or sampled/profiled context. Data MUST NOT dump an entire million-row workbook into a model prompt simply because the project is open.
Recovery and failure behaviour
Project/workbook saves and schema changes MUST be crash-safe. Failed imports, refreshes, transforms, SQL executions, exports or Visualise calculations MUST leave previous valid canonical data intact unless the user explicitly accepted a destructive operation whose partial effects are truthfully reported.
Structured failures include ProjectNotFound, WorkbookNotFound, SheetNotFound, TableNotFound, RecordNotFound, InvalidFormula, CircularReference, SchemaViolation, ConstraintViolation, RelationshipViolation, ConnectionUnavailable, AuthenticationRequired, SqlParseError, SqlExecutionFailed, MutationProtectionUnavailable, BackupFailed, RollbackFailed, PartialCommit, RefreshFailed, TransformFailed, VisualisationIncompatible, ExportCompatibilityLoss, RevisionConflict, PermissionDenied and CapabilityUnavailable plus provider/backend errors.
Data MUST distinguish 'rollback attempted' from 'rollback succeeded'. Recovery/audit metadata remains inspectable after failure.
Platform capability behaviour
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical Data project/workbook/schema/query/pipeline/cube/Visualisation model while capability-negotiating local DuckDB execution, LibreOffice-derived compatibility components, external database drivers, file access and hardware/resource differences.
A platform that cannot execute a particular local/provider capability MUST expose CapabilityUnavailable or route to an explicitly configured supported service; it MUST NOT silently substitute incompatible semantics.
When Home is absent at process start, Data follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract rather than launching an incompatible private runtime.
Acceptance requirements
Data is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
A representative workbook supports ordinary cell/formula editing, tables, formatting, sorting/filtering and save/reopen while preserving workbook/sheet/object identity.
Representative XLSX and ODS files round-trip through the declared LibreOffice-derived compatibility path within the documented compatibility contract, and the required donor source/version is present/recorded rather than replaced by a miniature spreadsheet clone.
Formula dependency recalculation updates affected dependants without requiring whole-workbook recomputation for unrelated edits.
List-valued and record-valued cells preserve multiple typed members across save/reopen and can be explicitly expanded/projected without silent stringification.
A nested table retains stable nested identity/schema and remains distinct from a relationship to independently canonical records.
A DataCube with at least three dimensions can be sliced/compared without duplicating separate sheets for every dimension member.
A relational table enforces a single or composite primary key and reports duplicate/missing-key violations.
A declared foreign-key relationship enforces configured referential integrity; one-to-many and many-to-many/junction-table modelling persist correctly.
Relationship Designer/ER view displays primary/foreign keys and cardinality from the canonical schema rather than maintaining duplicate diagram-only relationships.
Normalise proposes a decomposition with keys/relationships and previews migration before mutation; Flatten/Denormalise remains an explicit separate transformation.
DuckDB can query eligible project tables/local files and materialise a result into a native Data table without export/import duplication.
SQL mode in the persistent bar visibly shows the active target and executes native SQL against that target rather than routing commands through AI.
A read-only SQL query produces a typed virtualised result set with execution metadata and preserves prior valid results after a later failed query.
A consequential external/live SQL mutation is classified, exposes target/impact, establishes the required verified recovery strategy, obtains the applicable confirmation, executes through transaction/checkpoint protection where supported and records the actual outcome.
Data blocks a protected live mutation when required backup/rollback protection cannot be established and never falsely claims recovery succeeded.
Multi-statement SQL reports transactional atomicity or partial-execution risk and truthfully identifies any partial commit after failure.
AI-generated consequential SQL is visible/inspectable and cannot bypass per-action Data mutation approval.
A transformation pipeline can clean/join/derive data, rerun after source refresh and preserve prior valid output if refresh fails.
Eye → Visualise opens an adaptive view without modifying the workbook, recommends compatible representations from source semantics and permits manual field-role overrides.
Visualise supports representative specialised views including box plot, stem-and-leaf, probability/distribution cloud, tier list, scatter and alignment-style comparison with accessible non-visual equivalents.
A saved DataVisualisation can combine ranges/tables from at least two workbook sheets with explicit field mapping and continues to reference live canonical sources.
Selecting a supported Visualise mark can identify/go to its source record/cell where mapping is one-to-one.
A linked conversion from at least one structured Write/Present/Boards/Canvas artifact preserves source provenance and refresh mapping; a snapshot conversion remains independent.
Boards-style labels/checklists or equivalent source structures can become true multi-value/nested Data fields rather than comma-separated flattening.
Charts/pivots persist structured source configuration and refresh when source data changes.
Native rich features that cannot fit XLSX/ODS trigger explicit export-compatibility choices rather than silent flattening/lossless claims.
Large sheets/query results remain responsive through UI virtualisation, paging/streaming and bounded caches.
AI context is scoped to relevant Data objects and does not serialise the entire large project by default.
Keyboard/screen-reader users can operate spreadsheet, SQL, relational, Visualise and graph workflows without pointer-only dependencies.
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical Data model while capability-negotiating local/provider execution differences.
When Home is absent at process start, Data follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract.
Forms
Product role and runtime principle
9-1 Forms is the native CUI structured form, assessment, data-entry and lightweight interactive-application builder. It covers surveys, questionnaires, applications, registrations, feedback, quizzes/tests, database-entry interfaces, conversational interviews, live multiplayer quizzes and custom event-driven experiences while keeping simple forms fast to create.
The canonical result is a structured FormProject and runtime configuration, not a collection of rendered pages. Fields, pages, themes, logic, marking rules, timers, multiplayer state, Data bindings and custom mode behaviour remain typed editable state. The same semantic model is used by the builder, published runtime, AI, Automations and APIs.
Forms MUST support simple no-code creation without exposing advanced complexity by default, but the product ceiling MUST NOT be limited to the capabilities of conventional survey builders. Advanced logic, layout, assessment and multiplayer features use the same underlying canonical objects rather than separate incompatible modes.
Canonical project model
FormProject has stable FormID, ModeDefinition, FormVersions[], Pages[], Fields[], Components[], Theme, LogicGraphID where used, DataBindings[], MarkingScheme, QuestionBanks[], PublishingSettings, AccessPolicy, RuntimeSettings, CreatedAt, ModifiedAt and Revision.
Page/Section objects have stable PageID, ordered child components/fields, layout configuration, visibility rules and Revision. Field has stable FieldID, FieldType, label/help/content, response schema, required/validation state, appearance/layout state, marking configuration where applicable, Data binding where applicable and Revision.
Choice options, table columns, rubric criteria, marking rules, grading schemes, branching rules and reusable components have stable identity when independently addressable. Published runtime and stored responses reference IDs, not question text or screen coordinates.
Builder workspace and preview
The default builder provides a structured page/canvas editor, field/component palette, contextual Inspector, logic/mode controls, theme/layout controls and Preview/Test. Common tasks MUST NOT require the node editor.
Preview supports desktop, tablet, mobile and narrow embedded layouts. Interactive preview can simulate answers, validate branching, exercise marking rules, test Data bindings with safe test context and identify unreachable pages/conditions before publication.
Builder and preview operate on the same canonical FormProject. Preview MUST NOT create a separate approximation that can diverge from published behaviour.
Core field and component types
Forms supports at least short text, long text, number/decimal/currency, email, phone, date/time, duration, single choice, multiple choice, dropdown, checkbox/set, rating/scale, ranking, matrix/grid, file upload, signature where supported, person/reference picker, Data foreign-key lookup, rich text/content, image/media block, calculated/read-only field, hidden/system field, mathematical response, graph response, repeating group and table input.
Field types define canonical answer schemas rather than coercing everything to text. Validation, Data binding and marking consume the typed answer model.
Custom/reusable Form Components may contain multiple child fields and layout/logic, for example Address, Person details, Emergency contact or Rating + comment. Reusing a component preserves structured child identity rather than pasting an opaque widget.
Table input and repeating structured responses
Forms MUST provide a real TableInput field, not merely a multiple-choice grid. TableInput defines typed columns, optional fixed rows, respondent-added rows, minimum/maximum row count, required columns, per-cell/row validation, calculated columns, dropdown/reference columns, duplicate rules and Data bindings.
A table input may write multiple related Data records rather than serialising an entire table into one string. For example an expense report may submit one parent Report record plus one related Expense record per entered row.
Repeating groups provide similar semantics for card/form layouts where each repeated item has multiple fields. TableInput and repeating groups preserve stable row/item identity within a response.
Native modes: Form, Test and Quiz
Forms ships at least three first-party runtime presets built on the common Forms state/marking engine.
Form mode accepts any valid answer according to field validation. It is intended for surveys, applications, registration, feedback and general data collection. Correct/incorrect semantics are absent unless a field explicitly defines assessment behaviour.
Test mode supports correct/incorrect/partial answers, points, marking rules, grading schemes and result release. Respondents normally complete the assessment as a whole and receive score/grade/feedback according to configured release policy.
Quiz mode uses the same assessment engine but supports question-by-question evaluation/progression. After each answer the runtime may show correct/incorrect/partial state, explanation/feedback and then advance according to mode settings. A final score/grade can still be produced.
Mode semantics MUST be expressed through the common runtime/state system rather than three independent engines.
Custom modes and state-machine runtime
Advanced authors can create Custom Modes using the shared node/state system. A custom mode can define start state, question/component selection, timers, score variables, lives/attempts, branching, dialogue turns, participant state, completion conditions and result calculation.
Examples include 'answer three questions correctly as quickly as possible', adaptive difficulty, limited-lives games, interview/conversation flows, staged applications and game-show experiences.
Built-in Form/Test/Quiz behaviour SHOULD be representable as first-party presets over the same runtime concepts so custom modes do not fork core response, Data, accessibility or publishing infrastructure.
Marking engine and multiple accepted answers
Assessable fields support one or more typed MarkingRules. Rules can resolve Correct, Incorrect, Partial, NeedsReview or another configured outcome and award points according to explicit scoring policy.
Text questions can define multiple accepted correct answers. Normalised matching can optionally ignore case, trim/collapse whitespace, normalise Unicode and ignore selected punctuation/diacritics according to author settings.
Example: a question asking for the name of the central processor may accept 'CPU' and 'Central Processing Unit' as equivalent accepted answers without requiring AI.
Rules can be combined with explicit boolean logic such as AcceptedAnswer(A) OR AcceptedAnswer(B) OR Regex(C), and more complex marking flows can use the node editor where appropriate.
Regex validation and marking
Regex is supported for both response validation and marking. Authors can configure pattern, flags, explanatory label and accepted/rejected test cases.
The builder MUST include a regex tester with live example inputs, invalid-pattern diagnostics and clear indication of full-match versus partial-match semantics. Forms MUST NOT execute unbounded or unsafe regex behaviour in a way that can freeze the runtime; implementations use bounded/safe regex execution appropriate to the platform.
Regex rules remain inspectable structured MarkingRule/ValidationRule objects and can be combined with other deterministic rules.
AI, human and hybrid marking
Question-level AI marking can be enabled explicitly. AI marking uses a structured rubric with expected concepts/criteria, maximum points, optional sample correct/partial/incorrect answers, required/forbidden concepts and feedback policy. The result records awarded points, matched/missed criteria, feedback and uncertainty/review state rather than only an opaque prose verdict.
Marking mode may be deterministic automatic, mathematical/symbolic, AI, manual human or hybrid. Hybrid workflows can let deterministic rules resolve obvious answers, invoke AI for unresolved open responses and optionally require human moderation before release.
A useful default marking pipeline is deterministic accepted-answer/regex rules, then mathematical equivalence where applicable, then AI rubric evaluation only when configured and still unresolved. Authors can override this ordering.
QuestionResult records marking provenance so consequential results can show whether a mark came from exact rule, regex, symbolic maths evaluator, AI, human marker or combination.
Partial credit, grading and feedback
Assessments support points, weighted questions, partial credit, criterion/rubric scoring, optional penalties where explicitly configured and section/category subtotals.
GradingScheme maps score/percentage or configured measures to grade/band/pass state. Boundaries are structured editable rules rather than hard-coded labels.
Feedback can be configured per answer/rule/rubric criterion and released immediately, after a question, after submission, after manual review or at a configured release state.
LaTeX and visual mathematics editor
Forms MUST provide first-class mathematical authoring. MathExpression uses LaTeX-compatible canonical representation but can be edited through a visual equation editor so authors/respondents are not required to know LaTeX.
The editor supports fractions, powers/indices, roots, logarithms, trigonometry, calculus notation, sigma/product notation, vectors, matrices, inequalities, sets, piecewise expressions, probability/statistics notation, Greek/special symbols and aligned expressions where supported.
Visual and LaTeX modes edit the same expression and remain bidirectionally synchronised. Invalid LaTeX produces an explicit recoverable editing error rather than losing the prior valid expression.
MathAnswer types include numeric, algebraic expression, equation, inequality, interval, coordinate, vector, matrix, set, multiple expressions and free-working response. Numeric rules can configure exact value, absolute/percentage tolerance, significant figures, decimal places and units where applicable.
Graph plotter and graph-response questions
Forms MUST include a native mathematical graph plotter/editor for quiz/test content. Authors can define functions, equations, inequalities, points, coordinate tables, regions, axes, grid/domain/range configuration and other supported 2D graph primitives.
GraphResponse questions can ask respondents to place points, draw a line/curve, submit coordinates, enter a function/equation for plotting, identify a region or manipulate an existing graph according to declared tools.
Graph answers remain structured GraphDefinition/GraphResponse data, not screenshots. Marking compares the submitted mathematical/graph representation using configured tolerances/equivalence rules where supported.
MathExpression, GraphDefinition and related primitives SHOULD be reusable shared mathematical objects across Forms, Write, Present and other 9to1 surfaces rather than privately reinvented.
Question banks, randomisation, attempts and timing
Forms supports reusable QuestionBank objects with tags, subject/topic, difficulty, points, marking rules and other metadata. A Test/Quiz can select deterministic or random subsets subject to constraints such as minimum questions from specified categories.
Question/choice order can be randomised per participant where configured. Attempts can be unlimited, fixed-count, one-only or custom-mode controlled. Retry policies may target only incorrect questions.
Timing supports whole-assessment timers, per-question/per-section timers, countdowns, time bonus/penalty, late-submission policy and custom timer variables. Server-authoritative timing is required for multiplayer and integrity-sensitive modes.
Forms and Data bidirectional integration
Forms and Data are bidirectionally integrated through typed bindings. A form can store responses in a Data spreadsheet/table, relational table or permitted database-backed Data target while preserving field types, references, nested/repeating structures and provenance.
A FormField may bind to a stable Data TableID/FieldID rather than a physical spreadsheet column letter. Relational lookups can write foreign-key references; repeating/table input can create child/junction records where the mapping defines that behaviour.
Data may also define or evolve Form fields. Adding a compatible field to a bound Data schema can propose or automatically add an appropriate Forms field according to configured synchronisation policy. Forms changes may similarly propose/add Data fields where the binding policy permits.
Data schema synchronisation policies
Each Forms↔Data binding explicitly configures directionality: Forms→Data, Data→Forms or bidirectional. It also defines synchronisation mode such as Manual, Suggest changes, Automatic compatible changes or Strict schema binding.
Schema synchronisation MUST be migration-aware. Deleting or changing a Data field that has historical Form responses MUST NOT delete or reinterpret historical answers silently. Forms can archive/detach a field, migrate compatible data or surface a conflict according to policy.
Type changes, key/reference changes and destructive schema operations require preview of effect on field configuration, published versions, stored responses and dependent logic before commitment.
Full node editor and logic graph
Forms MUST expose the full shared 9to1 Node Graph Framework for advanced behaviour. Simple conditional logic remains available through friendly controls, but advanced authors can open the underlying Form Logic graph without creating a second incompatible rules engine.
Logic graphs have stable GraphID/NodeID/PortID identity, typed connections, grouping/comments, copy/paste/duplicate, undo/redo, validation, Draft/Published revision semantics and Dulche graph mutation through 9to1.NodeGraph.*.
Graph validation MUST detect incompatible ports, unreachable states where knowable, missing targets, cycles that would create uncontrolled update loops and client/server trust-boundary violations.
Form events, conditions and actions
Minimum Form events include FormOpened, PageEntered, FieldChanged/AnswerChanged, ValidationPassed/Failed, PageSubmitted, ResponseSaved, FormSubmitted, AnswerMarked, QuizGraded and runtime/session events defined below.
Conditions include equality/inequality, contains, numeric comparison/range, answered/unanswered, selected option, validation result, calculated value, Data lookup result, participant/user/session state and other registered typed predicates.
Actions include show/hide, enable/disable, required/optional, set/calculated value, jump to page/state, show message/content, add/remove repeating item, populate options, perform permitted Data lookup, trigger authorised Automation, mark/score, submit/block submission and custom-mode state transitions.
Security-critical validation and consequential actions MUST execute or be verified server-side; client-side visibility logic alone cannot be treated as an access-control or integrity boundary.
Appearance, theme and layout system
Forms MUST provide substantially deeper appearance control than conventional survey builders while preserving responsive accessibility. FormTheme includes typography, palette, backgrounds, surfaces/cards, borders, corner radius, shadows, spacing, content width, field/input appearance, buttons, progress/navigation, focus/error/success states and reusable design tokens.
Pages use a responsive structured layout system supporting full-width and multi-column arrangements, grid, grouped cards/panels, inline/stacked labels, compact/dense modes, hero/header regions, dividers and rich content. Layout is responsive rather than relying on arbitrary absolute positioning for ordinary form design.
Authors can configure logos, organisation branding, custom header/footer, background artwork and hosted-form identity. Custom domains/advanced branding integrate with the wider 9to1 web platform where supported.
Greater design freedom MUST NOT allow the form author to bypass minimum accessibility constraints such as semantic labels, focus order, contrast, tap targets or colour-independent state.
Reusable components and templates
Users/organisations can save reusable Form Components and FormTheme presets. Reusable components preserve structured child fields, validation, layout and optional logic while allowing controlled instance overrides.
Templates such as signup, application, event registration, feedback, quiz/test, database record editor and survey are starting configurations that produce ordinary editable FormProject state rather than locked special modes.
Publishing, versions and response compatibility
Forms has explicit Draft and Published runtime versions. Editing Draft MUST NOT mutate the currently published experience until the author publishes/activates the new version according to policy.
Every response records FormID and the FormVersionID/schema revision answered. Historical responses remain interpretable even when fields are renamed, moved, hidden or removed in later versions.
Publishing states include at least Draft, Published/Accepting responses and Closed, with optional scheduled open/close where the platform supports it. Authors configure whether in-progress respondents remain on the version they started or migrate only through explicitly safe rules.
Response model, save/resume and editing
Response has stable ResponseID, FormID/FormVersionID, responder/participant identity where known, Answer records keyed by FieldID, started/submitted timestamps, attachments, state, score/marking result where applicable, Data-write status and Revision.
Forms supports configurable draft/save-and-resume, edit-after-submit policy, response limits, duplicate-prevention policy and confirmation/next-action behaviour.
Historical answer values MUST remain attached to the field/version schema that produced them rather than being reinterpreted based only on the latest field label.
Multiplayer live-session runtime
Forms supports server-authoritative MultiplayerSession objects layered onto Form/Test/Quiz/custom modes. A LiveSession has stable SessionID, FormVersionID, hosts, Participants[], Teams[], current state/round/question, Scoreboard, timers, elimination/lives state, join policy, spectator policy, moderation state, event sequence and Revision.
Typical first-party session states include Lobby, Starting, QuestionActive, Marking/Reveal, RoundTransition and Finished, but custom modes may define richer state machines using the same runtime.
Multiplayer does not duplicate questions or marking rules. A Test/Quiz can be hosted live using its existing canonical content.
Joining, teams and host control
Live sessions support short join codes, QR/share links, CAKE ID authenticated joining, guest nickname joining where allowed, private/invite-only sessions, organisation/class restrictions, maximum participants, late-join rules and optional spectators.
Sessions support individual and team play. Team scoring/answer semantics may use one nominated answer, shared answer, majority vote, fastest member, average/aggregate scoring or custom graph-defined policy.
Host controls include participant/connection state, start/pause/advance, skip, extend time, lock joining, reveal answer, invalidate question/round, adjust score with audit history, eliminate/reinstate, remove participant, moderate names/content and end session.
Multiplayer quiz, knockout and game-show modes
A standard Multiplayer Quiz can synchronise question reveal, answer window, marking, reveal/feedback and scoreboard progression across participants.
Knockout mode supports policies such as incorrect/timeout eliminates, configurable lives, eliminate bottom N or bottom percentage, fastest N advance, cumulative threshold, team elimination, re-entry/resurrection rounds and sudden-death rules. These are structured mode parameters or logic-graph behaviour rather than hard-coded one-off UI.
Buzzer rounds support server-authoritative first-buzz ordering, answering rights, lockout/pass behaviour and host/human judging where configured.
Question presentation can be on participant devices, host/projector only, both, participant-specific or team-specific according to mode.
Conversational and interview modes
Custom modes may create turn-based conversational experiences such as job interviews, oral quizzes, panel discussions or AI quizmaster sessions. The interviewer can be an authorised human or configured AI agent; next questions may depend on prior structured answers/context.
Conversational responses are stored as structured turn/question/answer records with speaker/participant identity and optional rubric results, not only one giant transcript.
AI interviewers remain subject to configured scope, marking/review policy and disclosure requirements; human takeover/co-hosting can be supported where realtime collaboration infrastructure permits.
Multiplayer timing, reconnection and fairness
Multiplayer timing and state transitions are server-authoritative. Clients MUST NOT decide whether an answer arrived before timeout, who buzzed first, the final score or whether a participant is eliminated.
Session runtime records authoritative question-open/close and submission timestamps. Speed scoring MUST use a documented server-side policy and SHOULD avoid pretending millisecond differences are perfectly fair when network latency materially affects participants.
Reconnect preserves participant identity, submitted answers and session state according to configured reconnect policy. A short connection loss MUST NOT silently erase prior responses or create a duplicate participant.
Anti-cheat and assessment integrity
Forms MUST provide configurable anti-cheat/integrity controls, with stronger options available for Tests and live assessments while making clear that browser-based controls reduce opportunities but cannot guarantee that cheating is impossible.
Core controls include authenticated participant requirements, one active attempt/session per identity where configured, server-authoritative timers and answer locks, randomised question/choice order, question-bank variants, delayed answer/reveal policies, duplicate-session/device anomaly detection where permitted, copy/paste/context-menu restrictions where appropriate, visibility/focus-change logging or warnings where platform policy permits, per-question navigation restrictions, locked previous answers, and host moderation.
Assessment authors can configure whether focus/tab changes are ignored, logged, warned or treated as an integrity event. Such signals MUST NOT automatically prove misconduct; they are contextual evidence and may be unreliable on some platforms.
High-integrity deployments MAY integrate approved kiosk/lockdown or proctoring capabilities where separately configured, supported, legally permitted and appropriately disclosed/consented. Forms MUST NOT secretly access camera, microphone, screen or other sensitive capabilities.
Server-side validation, marking, attempt state and scoring MUST not trust client-supplied authority. Client code cannot award itself points, extend its own timer, resurrect an eliminated participant or reveal protected answers merely by modifying local state.
Question/answer payload delivery SHOULD minimise unnecessary early exposure: the runtime need not send future protected questions/correct answers to clients before they are authorised to see them.
Anti-cheat events and moderation actions are auditable, privacy-scoped and retained according to configured policy.
Live scoring and AI/human judging
Multiplayer scoring can consider correctness, partial credit, time, streak/difficulty or custom variables only when explicitly configured. ScorePolicy is structured and inspectable; speed bonuses are optional.
AI-marked questions in live modes define how asynchronous model latency interacts with progression: wait for all marks, score later, exclude AI-marked items from speed bonuses, or require human review. The runtime MUST NOT silently disadvantage a participant because one model call completed more slowly.
Human judges/hosts can accept/reject or adjust uncertain responses with an audit trail where the mode allows it.
Scoreboards and participant views
Scoreboards may show full live ranking, top N, team standings, personal position only, anonymous ranking, knockout/bracket/lives state or remain hidden until the end.
Accessibility/fairness settings can disable speed-based ranking or reduce competitive disclosure. Participant views show only state permitted by the session policy.
Privacy, abuse prevention and public access
Public forms support explicit access policy, rate limiting, abuse/spam controls, duplicate-response controls and configured CAPTCHA/challenge integration where appropriate. File uploads enforce type/size/count and malware/scanning policy through the shared storage/security layer where available.
Forms supports anonymous, link-based, CAKE ID authenticated and organisation-restricted access according to configuration. Responder identity requirements and privacy/consent text must be explicit.
Sensitive answer data is permission-scoped. Submission events MUST NOT leak response content to Automations, hosts or integrations that lack the required permission.
AI-assisted authoring, design and logic
Dulche can create forms from natural-language requirements or convert supported structured Write/Present/Data/Boards/Canvas content into Form fields/pages using canonical source objects rather than screenshots when possible.
AI can propose or modify fields, layout, themes, pages, branching, marking rubrics, question banks and logic graphs through typed Forms/NodeGraph actions. AI edits preserve FieldIDs/Data bindings where the user's intent is to reorganise rather than replace them.
Examples include 'turn this Write document into a survey', 'make this look like a university application portal', 'show a follow-up only when Other is selected' and 'reorganise this long form for mobile'.
Persistent AI bar and context
Forms hosts the global persistent Dulche AI bar. Semantic context includes FormID/FormVersionID, selected PageID/FieldID/ComponentID, field schema, layout/theme selection, Data bindings, logic graph selection, mode/state variables, marking rules, preview state and Revision.
Write-capable AI changes Forms only through typed Forms/shared-engine/NodeGraph actions and remains subject to permissions, revision control and per-action Data mutation approval when a Form operation changes linked Data.
Forms API
Forms' first-party API catalogue is exhaustive under the global API-parity rule. Minimum canonical entry points include:
9to1.Forms.CreateProject(config);
9to1.Forms.Open(formOrFileID);
9to1.Forms.AddPage(formID, config?);
9to1.Forms.AddField(formID, pageID, fieldType, config);
9to1.Forms.UpdateField(fieldID, patch);
9to1.Forms.AddTableInput(formID, pageID, config);
9to1.Forms.SetMode(formID, modeDefinition);
9to1.Forms.SetValidation(fieldID, rules);
9to1.Forms.SetMarking(fieldID, markingConfig);
9to1.Forms.CreateQuestionBank(formID, config);
9to1.Forms.AddQuestionToBank(bankID, fieldOrTemplateID);
9to1.Forms.SetTheme(formID, theme);
9to1.Forms.SetLayout(targetID, layout);
9to1.Forms.BindData(formID, bindingConfig);
9to1.Forms.SyncDataBinding(bindingID, options?);
9to1.Forms.Publish(formID, options?);
9to1.Forms.OpenResponses(formID);
9to1.Forms.CloseResponses(formID);
9to1.Forms.Submit(formVersionID, answers, context?);
9to1.Forms.Mark(responseID, options?);
9to1.Forms.CreateLiveSession(formVersionID, config);
9to1.Forms.JoinLiveSession(sessionID, participant, options?);
9to1.Forms.StartLiveSession(sessionID);
9to1.Forms.SubmitLiveAnswer(sessionID, participantID, fieldID, answer);
9to1.Forms.SetParticipantState(sessionID, participantID, patch);
9to1.Forms.AdvanceLiveSession(sessionID, action?);
9to1.Forms.EndLiveSession(sessionID, options?);
9to1.Forms.GetResponse(responseID);
9to1.Forms.ExportResponses(formID, format, options?);
Advanced logic and custom-mode graph mutation uses 9to1.NodeGraph.* where the shared Node Graph Framework is canonical. Data, Files, identity and other shared-domain operations use their owning namespaces when canonical.
Automation and typed events
Automations, Spaces, Dulche and authorised integrations can consume typed Forms events subject to permissions. Useful events include FormPublished, FormOpened/Closed, ResponseStarted/Saved/Submitted/Updated, ResponseMarked, QuizGraded, DataSyncConflict, LiveSessionStarted/Ended, ParticipantJoined/Left/Reconnected, QuestionOpened/Closed, LiveAnswerSubmitted, ParticipantEliminated/Reinstated and ScoreChanged.
Events expose stable IDs and minimal required metadata. Sensitive answers/identity are included only when the consuming principal has the corresponding permission.
Accessibility
Builder and published runtime MUST be keyboard-operable and screen-reader compatible for field entry, navigation, maths editor alternatives, graph-response controls, table input, validation, quiz feedback and multiplayer participation.
Every field has semantic label/help/error association. Dynamic show/hide/focus behaviour uses accessible announcements and predictable focus management. State MUST NOT rely on colour alone.
Graph/math questions provide accessible textual/equation representations and non-pointer input paths for required operations where feasible. Multiplayer score/rank changes should not create unusable constant announcements; meaningful state updates are summarised appropriately.
Theme/layout freedom is constrained by minimum contrast, logical focus order, responsive reflow and touch-target requirements.
Performance and realtime behaviour
Published forms load only the assets/question state required for the current permitted experience. Large question banks, response sets, Data-backed option lists and multiplayer sessions use paging/streaming/cache strategies rather than unbounded client payloads.
Realtime multiplayer uses server-authoritative event sequencing and bounded fan-out/state updates. One slow participant or AI-marking task MUST NOT freeze the whole host interface.
Autosave/draft persistence is incremental and resilient to transient network loss according to configured offline/retry policy.
Recovery and failure behaviour
FormProject edits, Draft/Published versions and stored responses are crash-safe. A failed publish MUST leave the prior published version available unless explicitly withdrawn.
Response submission uses idempotency/operation identity where needed so retries do not create accidental duplicate records. Partial Forms→Data writes are detected and surfaced with recoverable state rather than falsely reporting a complete submission.
Structured failures include FormNotFound, VersionNotFound, FieldNotFound, ValidationFailed, MarkingUnavailable, MathParseError, GraphResponseInvalid, RegexInvalid, DataBindingUnavailable, DataSyncConflict, PublishFailed, ResponseClosed, DuplicateAttempt, SessionNotFound, SessionClosed, ParticipantNotFound, JoinRejected, IntegrityPolicyViolation, MultiplayerStateConflict, AIJudgeUnavailable, RevisionConflict, PermissionDenied and CapabilityUnavailable plus shared backend/provider errors.
Platform capability behaviour
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical FormProject, response, mode, Data binding, graph and multiplayer-session model while capability-negotiating device features, realtime transport, identity providers, proctoring/kiosk integrations and mathematical/rendering backends.
A platform that lacks a configured capability exposes CapabilityUnavailable or a documented fallback; it MUST NOT silently change answer schema, marking or assessment-integrity semantics.
When Home is absent at process start, Forms follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract rather than launching an incompatible private runtime.
Acceptance requirements
Forms is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
A simple Form can be created, styled, published, completed and responses reviewed while preserving stable Form/Page/Field/Response identity.
Form, Test and Quiz presets use the common runtime but exhibit their intended answer/marking/progression semantics.
A custom mode built with the node editor can implement a non-standard state machine such as 'three correct answers as quickly as possible' without forking the Forms runtime.
TableInput accepts multiple typed rows with per-column validation and can map rows to related Data records.
A question accepts multiple deterministic correct answers such as CPU and Central Processing Unit under configured normalisation rules.
Regex validation/marking can be tested in the builder, rejects an invalid pattern safely and applies configured full/partial-match semantics.
AI marking uses a structured rubric, records marking provenance and can enter NeedsReview rather than fabricating certainty.
Hybrid marking can resolve deterministic answers first and route only unresolved configured answers to AI/human review.
A visual maths expression round-trips to LaTeX and back without losing supported structure; malformed LaTeX does not destroy the previous valid expression.
A graph-response question stores structured graph data and can be marked against configured mathematical/coordinate criteria without relying on a screenshot.
A Form can write responses into a Data spreadsheet/relational table while preserving types, references and nested/repeating structures.
Data→Forms schema synchronisation can add a compatible field according to configured policy; destructive schema changes preserve historical responses and surface migration/conflict rather than silently deleting data.
Simple conditional logic such as answer X → show question Y is configurable without nodes and is represented consistently in the advanced logic graph.
Node validation detects a cyclic/uncontrolled update loop or invalid target without locking the published runtime.
Theme/layout controls can produce a branded responsive multi-column form while accessibility constraints remain satisfied.
Draft changes do not affect the currently published version until publication, and historical responses remain interpretable against the FormVersion they answered.
A standard live multiplayer quiz synchronises question state, answer windows, scoring and reveal using server-authoritative state.
A knockout session can eliminate participants according to configured rules and finish when its declared completion condition is met.
Team and buzzer-style sessions preserve server-authoritative answer/buzz ordering and configured scoring semantics.
A disconnected participant can reconnect according to policy without losing prior submitted answers or duplicating identity.
Anti-cheat settings can randomise questions/options, enforce server-side timers/locks and log configured focus-change/integrity events without treating such signals as automatic proof of misconduct.
Protected future questions/correct answers are not unnecessarily delivered to a participant client before authorised reveal.
Client-side manipulation cannot self-award points, extend authoritative timers, reveal protected answers or reinstate an eliminated participant.
Optional high-integrity integrations require explicit configuration/capability and do not secretly activate camera/microphone/screen capture.
An AI-marked multiplayer question follows the configured latency/fairness policy and does not silently use model-response speed as participant performance.
Forms↔Data write failures expose partial/retry state and do not falsely report submission success.
Keyboard and screen-reader users can complete representative simple, assessment, table, maths and multiplayer workflows.
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical Forms model while capability-negotiating platform-specific realtime/integrity features.
When Home is absent at process start, Forms follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract.
Developer Apps
Dev
Product role and engineering principle
9-1 Dev is the native CUI professional software-development environment. It MUST be fully useful without AI and provide mature project/workspace management, source editing, language tooling, build/run/test, debugging, terminal access, package/dependency management, source-control integration, visual CUI development, extension development, remote/container environments and structured agentic coding.
Dev is the authoritative code-development surface. Specialised products such as Stack, Sites and AI Studio retain their own domain authority, but Dev can open, inspect, edit and run their developer-facing project resources through stable shared identities and typed APIs.
Repository-aware AI mutations MUST use typed code/file/project/task actions and MUST expose the resulting reviewable change set. Opaque desktop automation MUST NOT be used when a structured development action exists.
Canonical workspace and project model
DevWorkspace has stable WorkspaceID, Roots[], Projects[], OpenEditors[], Tasks[], RunConfigurations[], DebugConfigurations[], Toolchains[], Environments[], SourceControlBindings[], ExtensionState, WorkspaceSettings, CreatedAt, ModifiedAt and Revision.
A workspace may contain multiple folders, repositories and related projects. Monorepos, client/server solutions and multi-language workspaces MUST NOT require flattening into one artificial project type.
Project has stable ProjectID, ProjectTypeID, language/framework metadata, source roots, build system, package/dependency metadata, target platforms, toolchain requirements, run/debug configurations, preview providers and Revision. Dev SHOULD consume existing ecosystem project files rather than replacing them with a proprietary project model where an established project format exists.
New Project workflow and project catalogue
File → New Project opens a searchable/filterable catalogue analogous to mature IDE project creation. Filters include language, framework, platform, project type, target runtime, installed toolchains, 9to1 product/surface and organisation templates.
First-party examples include console applications, CUI applications, class/static/shared libraries, web/API services, test projects, Python packages/CLI applications, Sites projects, Android/mobile projects, operating-system/kernel/bootloader projects, 9to1 extensions, CUI component libraries, AI provider/tool projects and other supported templates.
Project providers/extensions MAY register additional project templates, languages, frameworks and target types. The catalogue MUST NOT be hard-coded so tightly that adding a new ecosystem requires changing Dev core.
After selecting a project type Dev exposes only applicable framework/toolchain/runtime options and validates requirements before creation. Missing required SDK/toolchain components are shown explicitly with install/configure actions where supported.
9to1 Extension project type
9to1 Extension is a first-party New Project type. Its creation flow allows the developer to select one or more target 9to1 applications/surfaces and one or more contribution types.
Target applications may include Dev, Write, Present, Data, Boards, Canvas, Forms, Motion, Wave, Picture, Sites, AI Studio, Stack, Browse, Home, Files, Spaces and other extension-capable surfaces. Multi-target extensions are supported.
Contribution choices are filtered per target. Examples include Dev language/toolchain/debugger/project-template/editor/tool-window contributions; Forms fields/marking providers/modes; Data sources/transforms/visualisations/functions; AI Studio model/tool/evaluator/workflow providers; shared CUI components; Node Graph nodes; commands and integrations.
The wizard generates the canonical extension manifest, SDK/API references, initial permission declarations, test scaffolding and appropriate extension-host Run configurations. Generated scaffolding MUST contain only selected contributions rather than a giant all-products starter.
Editor and navigation
The source editor includes tabs, preview/pinned tabs, split editors, editor groups, breadcrumbs, outline/symbol view, optional minimap, line numbers, indentation/whitespace guides, bracket matching, folding, multi-cursor, rectangular selection, snippets, configurable keybindings, encoding/line-ending awareness, large-file mode and undo/redo.
Search/navigation includes file search, workspace text/regex search, go to line/file/symbol, references, implementations and structural/semantic search where the language provider supports it.
Editor state references canonical Files/project identity where possible rather than treating an absolute filesystem path as permanent identity.
Language intelligence and parsing
Dev uses established language tooling protocols/providers where practical. LSP or equivalent providers supply completion, hover, signature help, go-to-definition/declaration/type/implementation, references, rename, code actions, semantic diagnostics, document/workspace symbols, formatting and semantic tokens.
Tree-sitter or an equivalent maintained parser MAY provide fast syntax structure, incremental parsing, selections and editor features where suitable, while language-specific semantic operations remain owned by the relevant language/tooling provider.
Dev MUST NOT implement language semantics using fragile regex parsing where a maintained compiler/LSP/parser exists.
Toolchain Manager and built-in/provisionable toolchains
Dev provides a first-class Toolchain Manager. A Toolchain has stable ToolchainID, language, provider, compiler/runtime/interpreter, version, target architectures, debugger, language server, package manager, environment binding, capability state and provenance.
Core supported ecosystems SHOULD be usable out of the box through bundled or one-click provisionable toolchains where licensing/platform constraints permit. Examples include .NET SDK/Roslyn for C#/F#, LLVM/Clang for C/C++, CPython plus Python language/debug/package tooling, rustc/Cargo, a JDK for Java/Kotlin and the relevant JavaScript/TypeScript runtimes/tooling.
Python is treated correctly as a runtime/interpreter ecosystem rather than inaccurately labelling every execution as compilation. Native/package compilation tools may be added where project requirements need them.
Platform-native toolchains such as MSVC may be discovered and used when installed. Remote/container environments expose their own toolchains through the same abstraction.
Missing compiler/runtime indication
Dev MUST make toolchain readiness obvious before build/run. It must distinguish missing compiler/runtime, wrong version, missing debugger, missing language server, missing package manager, registry/authentication failure and general build failure.
A project requirement such as '.NET SDK >= 10', 'clang >= 20' or 'Python 3.14' is compared against the selected environment. The UI shows Ready or explicit environment issues with required versus installed versions.
Errors such as command-not-found or process spawn failure MUST NOT be the primary user experience when Dev can determine that a required toolchain component is missing. Supported components can be installed/configured directly through a typed toolchain operation.
Build pipeline and tasks
Dev supports structured Tasks and BuildPipelines. A pipeline may contain Restore, Generate, Compile, Link, Package, Test, Sign or other project-defined stages with dependencies, parallelism rules, environment, working directory, cancellation, timeout and diagnostics matching.
Build UI exposes stage-level state such as pending/running/succeeded/failed/cancelled and routes compiler/linter/build diagnostics into the common Problems model.
Tasks can be project-defined, extension-provided or inferred from recognised ecosystem files, but generated/inferred tasks remain inspectable and editable.
Run configurations and target-aware Run
Run means execute the selected project's declared launch target rather than universally starting one host executable. RunConfiguration has stable ID, provider/type, target artifact/project, arguments, environment, working directory, target platform/device, pre-launch tasks, preview provider and Revision.
Examples include console → terminal, web → development server + preview, Android → emulator/device install + launch, CUI application → application runtime, 9to1 extension → extension development host, operating system → virtual machine, and library → test/sample host where configured.
The Run selector shows the exact active target and environment. Dev MUST NOT silently run a different configuration because another panel gained focus.
Operating-system and kernel project support
OS/kernel/bootloader projects are first-class project types. Their Run pipeline may build the configured kernel/EFI/bootloader/ISO/disk image, verify the output artifact, start the configured virtual machine, attach the boot media and expose display/serial/debug channels in Dev.
An OS project can define architecture, firmware type, CPU/RAM, graphics, boot image/disk, networking, serial ports, snapshots, debugger transport and other virtual-machine settings through a VirtualMachineRunConfiguration.
Pressing Run on a valid OS project can therefore implement Build → Package boot artifact → Launch VM → Boot → attach configured console/debugger without the developer manually reconstructing a hypervisor command each time.
Virtual machine provider and OS preview
Virtualisation uses a provider abstraction. QEMU is an appropriate first-party/default provider where supported, with hardware acceleration through the host's available mechanisms. Additional providers may register through extensions.
Project state stores semantic VM settings rather than treating opaque provider CLI flags as the only canonical configuration. Provider-specific advanced settings may still be exposed where necessary.
The VM may render in an embedded Dev run/preview panel or a pop-out window and exposes power/reset/pause, display, serial console, boot logs, configured device state, basic performance information, snapshots and debugger status.
Workspace trust rules apply: opening an unknown repository MUST NOT automatically execute build scripts, boot images or VM configurations.
Low-level OS debugging
Where the selected VM/debugger provider supports it, OS development integrates with the ordinary debugger plus low-level views for registers, memory, disassembly, symbols, raw addresses, threads/cores and source mapping.
Serial/debug output is a structured run channel. Kernel panic or boot output remains attached to the run session and can be correlated with debugger/build state.
VM snapshots can be created/restored for repeatable kernel, driver, installer and boot-sequence debugging.
Debugger
Dev provides a full debugger using DAP or another maintained abstraction where practical. Supported capabilities include launch/attach, source/conditional breakpoints, hit-count breakpoints where supported, logpoints, continue/pause, step into/over/out, call stack, scopes, variables, watches, expression evaluation, threads/processes and exception breakpoints.
Capabilities are negotiated per debugger/provider; Dev MUST NOT expose controls that imply unsupported debugger semantics.
Testing and Test Explorer
Testing is a first-class typed subsystem. Test Explorer shows project/suite/test identity, running/passed/failed/skipped state, duration, failure output, source location and rerun capability.
Users and AI can run one test, a selection, file/suite/project/workspace set or previously failed tests. Test results have stable identities and are available to AI/change review without scraping terminal output.
Problems and diagnostics
Compiler, language-server, linter, build, package and test failures feed a common Problems model. Diagnostic records include provider/source, severity, message, code, file/resource identity, range and related information/quick fixes where available.
Diagnostics are semantic Dev objects consumable by UI, APIs and Dulche; they are not only coloured text in a terminal.
Terminal integration
Dev uses the shared Terminal runtime rather than implementing an incompatible second terminal emulator. It supports multiple tabs/panes, shell profiles, project/environment working-directory binding, environment variables, command history, task integration and clickable file/line diagnostics where supported.
A Dev terminal remains a real shell terminal and does not require AI for ordinary command execution. Terminal actions use shared Terminal APIs when canonical.
Source control and Stack integration
Stack remains the canonical 9to1 source-control/collaboration product. Dev presents working-tree/project source-control state and uses Stack/Git APIs for changed files, hunks, staged/unstaged state where applicable, branch/twig/leaf state, history, blame, conflicts, upstream state and other supported collaboration context.
Dev MUST NOT implement a separate competing project/branch model that diverges from Stack. It can expose conventional Git concepts directly when the backing repository uses them and map Stack-specific structures through the Stack contract.
Source-control state is accessible without AI and is also available to Dulche/agents as typed context.
Diff and review editor
Dev provides side-by-side, unified/inline and word-level diff views with file navigation, hunk/line selection where safe, staging/reverting, conflict resolution and navigation between changes.
Diff targets include working tree versus source-control base, branch/Stack comparisons, commits and AI change sets. Each comparison MUST identify its left/right revisions explicitly.
AI-generated changes MUST NOT bypass normal diff/review visibility.
AI ChangeSet model
Every mutating AI coding pass has a stable AIChangeSetID recording initiating task/prompt, model/agent identity where available, starting workspace/repository revision, exact file operations/patches, created/deleted/moved resources, child-agent contributions, tests/tasks run, diagnostics before/after, completion status and timestamps.
Dev distinguishes the AI-pass diff from the overall working-tree diff. Existing user modifications are not relabelled as AI-authored merely because an AI later edited the same file.
Revert AI Change attempts to reverse only the recorded AI patch/change set while preserving unrelated user changes. If later overlapping edits prevent safe automatic reversal, Dev surfaces a conflict rather than discarding work.
AI review workflow
Dev supports Review first and Apply then review workflows. Review first presents proposed patches before application; Apply then review applies scoped edits and immediately exposes them in the AI review surface. Workspace/user policy selects the default.
Review supports accept/reject by file and hunk, and finer region/line review where the patch model can apply it safely. AI may attach explanatory review annotations to hunks without inserting those explanations as source comments.
Review summaries include build/test/diagnostic outcomes where they were actually run, for example build passed, tests passed/failed, new warnings and resolved diagnostics. Dev MUST NOT claim tests/builds succeeded unless those executions occurred.
Structured AI coding and agentic development
Dulche/agent context includes workspace/project/repository identity, selected files/ranges/symbols, diagnostics, references/call relationships where available, tests, tasks/builds, source-control state, package state, terminal/run results and relevant preview state.
AI actions use typed operations such as read/search file, find symbol/references, create/move/delete file, apply patch/edit, semantic refactor, run task/test, inspect diagnostics, inspect diff, manage approved package operations and invoke owning shared APIs.
Longer agentic development can inspect, plan, edit, build/test, diagnose, iterate and present the final change set within an explicit scope. Agent Activity exposes current goal, operation, files examined/changed, validation, blockers, retries, subtasks/child agents and pending human decisions.
Parallel agents require scoped workspaces/branches/worktrees or another safe isolation/reconciliation mechanism. They MUST NOT blindly race edits against the same canonical files.
Symbol-aware editing and refactoring
Dev exposes code symbols such as class/type, function/method, property/field, interface, namespace/module and references when supplied by the language provider. AI and manual operations SHOULD target semantic symbols where possible rather than fragile character offsets.
Refactoring uses language/provider semantics where available: rename symbol, extract method/function, inline, move symbol, organise imports, change signature, safe delete and generate/implement members. Global text replacement MUST NOT substitute for a supported semantic refactor.
Package and dependency management
Package management is first-class while preserving ecosystem-native package formats, registries, manifests and lockfiles. Dev provides a common Dependencies view over direct packages, transitive packages, framework/runtime references, project references and relevant native/system dependencies.
Package installation/update/removal ultimately uses the configured ecosystem package manager and updates the real project/lock files. Dev MUST NOT create a proprietary dependency declaration that masks or conflicts with the project's native package manager.
Dependency graph view MAY reuse the shared Node Graph Framework to show direct/transitive relationships and version conflicts while preserving the actual underlying manifests.
NuGet and .NET dependency support
Dev MUST support NuGet for .NET projects where the configured .NET toolchain supports it. It understands PackageReference/project files, package sources, authenticated/private feeds, package restore and lock-file conventions.
The package UI can expose Installed, Updates and Browse views plus package version, source, target-framework compatibility, dependency tree, licence metadata and known advisory/deprecation state where reliable metadata exists.
NuGet actions use the actual .NET/NuGet tooling and resulting project/lockfile changes appear in the normal source diff. Private-feed credentials use shared secure credential infrastructure.
Other package ecosystems
Supported providers include, where installed/configured: npm/pnpm/Yarn and package.json/workspaces/lockfiles; pip/uv/Poetry/pyproject/requirements/virtual environments; Cargo/Cargo.toml; Maven/Gradle; CMake/Meson project dependencies plus vcpkg/Conan; and additional extension-provided package systems.
Dev makes the selected Python environment, Node runtime, .NET SDK and analogous environment-critical context clearly visible. Dependency failures distinguish registry unavailable, authentication required, package/version missing, incompatible version and restore incomplete.
AI/agent package changes MUST use the configured package manager and preserve the project's lockfile/dependency conventions unless the task explicitly requests migration.
Dependency integrity and reproducibility
Dev respects ecosystem lockfiles and project-local version constraints. Package operations SHOULD be reproducible and show manifest/lockfile diffs.
When authoritative advisory metadata is available Dev may surface known vulnerabilities, deprecated/yanked versions, licence metadata and conflicts. It MUST distinguish an external advisory from an AI-generated suspicion.
Offline/network/authentication states are represented accurately rather than collapsing every package restore problem into a generic build failure.
Native 9to1 extension platform
Dev is the primary development/debugging environment for a shared native 9to1 Extension platform. Extensions MAY contribute language/toolchain/debugger/formatter/linter providers, project templates, package providers, editors, commands, tool windows, CUI/visual-builder components, AI context/tools, Node Graph node types and product-specific contributions exposed by host APIs.
One extension package may target multiple 9to1 products through explicit contribution contracts; products do not need separate unrelated plugin formats for the same extension.
Extensions use a versioned manifest declaring ExtensionID, publisher/name/version, compatible host/API versions, entry points, target products, contributions, permissions/capabilities, dependencies, supported platforms, assets, update channel and signature/provenance.
Extension permissions, isolation and trust
Extensions declare required capabilities such as workspace read/write, process execution, network, terminal, credential access, Files, Stack or AI/model access. The host can present permissions during install/enable; low-risk themes/components MUST NOT silently inherit arbitrary process/filesystem/network rights.
Extension execution is isolated where practical with crash containment, startup timeout, resource monitoring, per-extension logs, disable/restart and safe-mode recovery. A broken extension SHOULD NOT crash-loop the whole Dev process.
Extension APIs are versioned/capability-negotiated. Deprecated APIs produce migration diagnostics and compatibility behaviour where reasonable rather than silent breakage.
Extension development host and inspector
Run on a 9to1 Extension project can launch the selected target product's clean Extension Host with the development extension loaded and debugger/logging attached. Multi-target extensions offer explicit target-host run choices.
Extension Inspector exposes registered contributions, activated services, requested permissions, host/API compatibility, logs/errors, extension-host state and performance/resource information where available.
Extension integration tests can target selected hosts and permissions without requiring installation into the developer's normal production profile.
Discover distribution and private extensions
Extension browsing/distribution integrates with the shared Discover/catalogue experience rather than creating an unrelated marketplace. Dev can filter Discover to compatible Dev/9to1 extensions and open listing/install/update flows through the shared extension service.
Extension listings expose publisher, version, compatible hosts/platforms, permissions, licence, source repository where supplied, dependencies, changelog and trust/signature information.
Organisations/workspaces may distribute private extensions according to the shared identity/permission model.
Sites integration
Sites and Dev share canonical project/resource identity. A Sites project can Open in Dev to expose underlying source/components/routes/styles/server functions/configuration/dependencies/tests/deployment configuration where that Sites project model makes those resources code-editable.
Sites visual edits and Dev source edits SHOULD round-trip when the underlying representation is intentionally round-trippable. Unsupported visual-only structures MUST be represented as managed boundaries rather than silently destroyed by source editing.
Web/Sites-compatible Run/Preview may use Sites preview/runtime infrastructure for responsive preview, route inspection, development server integration, preview environments and deployment-oriented diagnostics without Dev duplicating the entire Sites authoring product.
AI Studio integration
AI Studio remains the specialised authoring/testing environment for models, agents, prompts, evaluations, tools and AI workflows. Dev is the engineering environment that consumes and extends those resources in application source.
AI Studio resources referenced by a Dev project retain shared stable identities. Dev can Open in AI Studio, while AI Studio can Open source in Dev for custom tools, connectors, provider code, SDK integration and evaluation scripts.
Dev may embed selected AI testing/inspection panels such as test conversation, structured output, tool calls, latency/token metadata where available, but MUST NOT reimplement the complete AI Studio product.
Shared Sites + Dev + AI Studio workflows
A project can combine Sites-managed frontend resources, Dev-managed application/backend source and AI Studio-managed agent/model resources without export/copy steps between products. Cross-product references use canonical IDs and declared version/revision bindings.
Changing a shared AI resource or Sites component follows its owning product's version/revision rules; Dev detects relevant updates/conflicts instead of silently copying stale snapshots.
Visual CUI Builder
Dev MUST include a native visual CUI builder for CUI applications/components. The core layout is Component Tree + Visual Canvas + contextual Inspector, with source editing available alongside it.
The builder exposes registered CUI controls/components such as text, buttons, inputs, switches, selectors, menus, tabs, lists/tables/trees, cards/panels, dialogs, navigation, images/media, canvas/chart surfaces and project-defined components.
Visual editing manipulates the same canonical CUI representation/source model used by the runtime. Dev MUST NOT maintain a hidden proprietary canvas model that drifts from or overwrites hand-written CUI source.
Visual CUI layout, properties and bindings
The CUI builder supports hierarchy/nesting, reorder, grid/flex/dock-style layout according to CUI's real layout model, padding/margin/gap, alignment, min/max sizing, responsive behaviour, breakpoints, visibility/overflow and other supported CUI layout properties.
The Inspector exposes real component properties grouped into content, layout, appearance, behaviour/events, data bindings and accessibility. Editing an Inspector property changes the canonical source/model and source changes update the canvas.
Bindings such as model property → UI property and command/event bindings are first-class typed objects where CUI supports them. Simple event-handler creation can generate/navigate to real source handlers; graph-based behaviour may use the shared Node Graph Framework where the project architecture chooses it.
CUI states, component authoring and accessibility
Visual preview supports representative states such as default, hover, pressed, focused, disabled, selected, loading, empty and validation error where components expose them.
Developers can visually author reusable custom CUI components with typed properties/events/slots and reuse them throughout a project.
The builder continuously surfaces accessibility diagnostics such as missing labels, contrast problems, focus-order issues, unreachable controls, inadequate target size and colour-only state. These diagnostics integrate with the normal Problems model.
Two-way source and visual round-trip
Selecting a component in source/tree SHOULD highlight it in the visual preview where source mapping exists; selecting/inspecting a rendered element SHOULD reveal the owning component/source symbol/range where safe.
Hand-written/custom constructs that cannot be represented by a visual editor remain code-defined and preserved. The builder MUST NOT delete or rewrite unsupported code merely to force visual round-tripping.
Visual AI edits such as 'make this sidebar collapse below 800px' mutate real CUI properties/layout/source through typed actions and therefore appear in normal code/AI diffs.
Live split view and preview providers
Dev supports flexible split layouts including Code | Preview, Code | Diff, Diff | Preview, Code | Terminal, Code | Tests, Code | AI and debugger-oriented layouts. Workspace/project layouts can be saved.
PreviewProvider is a typed project/extension capability. Representative providers include CUI live render, Sites/web preview, Markdown render, extension host/sample host, AI Studio tool test harness, Android emulator/device and OS virtual-machine display/serial view.
In Code | Preview mode, the developer can resize/swap panes and optionally Follow editor or Pin a particular component/page/application preview while editing related files.
Hot reload and last-valid preview
Where the selected runtime supports it, source changes trigger incremental build/hot reload into the preview. Preview state clearly distinguishes Live, Building, Reloading, Build failed, Disconnected and Paused.
If a new build fails, Dev preserves the last valid preview when technically possible and overlays/links the new diagnostics rather than replacing useful state with a blank pane.
PreviewConfiguration can retain viewport/device, route/component target, theme/state/sample data, environment and other provider-specific design-time inputs.
Interactive preview and source inspection
Applicable previews are interactive. CUI/web previews can accept pointer/keyboard/navigation input, resize, hover/focus state and other runtime interactions without becoming the general Browse product.
Inspect element can expose component/type, source file/range, runtime bounds, computed style/layout, bindings, accessibility state and event handlers where the preview provider supplies mappings.
Responsive preview presets include phone, tablet, desktop and custom sizes where applicable.
Visual diff and AI preview validation
UI-oriented change review MAY offer Code diff | Visual diff and/or Diff | Preview. Source diff remains authoritative; visual comparison supplements engineering review rather than replacing it.
Where a preview provider supports before/after rendering, AI review can show previous/current render or affected component state and link visual differences back to the associated source changes.
AI-generated UI work SHOULD perform build/runtime/visual validation when the required preview/inspection capability is available and within scope. Passing compilation alone is not sufficient evidence that a visual task is correct.
Remote, container and reproducible environments
Dev supports environment adapters such as Local, WSL where available, SSH remote, devcontainer/container, cloud development environment and other extension-provided environments.
File operations, LSP/toolchains, tasks, debugging and package operations execute in the selected environment where appropriate. Remote development SHOULD run language servers/build tools near the project filesystem rather than blindly copying whole repositories to the client.
Dev recognises project-native environment definitions such as devcontainer.json rather than replacing them with an incompatible format.
Workspace trust and execution security
Opening a repository does not automatically trust or execute repository-controlled code. Workspace Trust controls execution of tasks/build scripts, package lifecycle scripts, debugger launch, extension recommendations, VM boot/run configurations and other code-execution surfaces.
Dev clearly separates reading/editing files from launching code, installing packages, network access, credential access, privilege elevation and deployment/external side effects.
Secrets/tokens use shared credential infrastructure where possible and MUST NOT be unnecessarily exposed to AI context, logs, source control, telemetry or generated diffs.
API and HTTP developer tooling
Dev SHOULD provide a native developer-oriented HTTP/API request tool for method, URL, headers, auth, body, environment variables, saved requests and response inspection, with WebSocket/event-stream capability where supported.
This tool remains developer-focused and does not replace Browse. Saved requests are project/workspace resources and secrets use secure variable/credential references.
Notebook and interactive execution
Where relevant to supported ecosystems, Dev MAY provide notebook/cell-oriented interactive execution with code cells, rich outputs, plots and variable/kernel state. Notebook capability is developer-oriented and MUST NOT duplicate Data's full analytical spreadsheet/database experience.
Interactive execution uses the selected environment/toolchain and clearly identifies kernel/runtime state.
Database developer handoff
Basic database/schema/query context may be surfaced for development, but Data remains the full database/analysis product. Dev can Open in Data or embed/link query/schema results through typed integration rather than building a second competing database IDE.
Persistent AI bar and context
Dev hosts the global persistent Dulche AI bar. Semantic context includes WorkspaceID, ProjectID, selected files/ranges/symbols, diagnostics, build/test results, source-control/Stack state, packages/toolchains, Run/Debug/Preview configuration, active environment, CUI visual selection and Revision.
Write-capable AI uses typed Dev/Files/Stack/Terminal/package/toolchain/NodeGraph actions under the owning API contracts and produces an AIChangeSet for repository/source mutations.
Dev API
Dev's first-party API catalogue is exhaustive under the global API-parity rule. Minimum canonical entry points include:
9to1.Dev.OpenWorkspace(workspaceOrFolder);
9to1.Dev.CreateProject(templateID, config);
9to1.Dev.OpenProject(projectID);
9to1.Dev.OpenFile(fileIDOrPath);
9to1.Dev.ReadFile(fileIDOrPath, range?);
9to1.Dev.ApplyEdit(target, edit, options?);
9to1.Dev.CreateFile(projectID, location, content?);
9to1.Dev.MoveFile(fileID, destination);
9to1.Dev.Search(workspaceID, query, options?);
9to1.Dev.FindSymbols(workspaceID, query, options?);
9to1.Dev.FindReferences(symbolID, options?);
9to1.Dev.Refactor(target, refactorType, config?);
9to1.Dev.GetDiagnostics(scope, options?);
9to1.Dev.RunTask(taskID, options?);
9to1.Dev.RunTests(scope, options?);
9to1.Dev.StartDebug(configurationID);
9to1.Dev.SetBreakpoint(target, config);
9to1.Dev.Run(configurationID, options?);
9to1.Dev.GetToolchainStatus(projectID, environmentID?);
9to1.Dev.InstallToolchain(toolchainRequirement, options?);
9to1.Dev.GetDependencies(projectID);
9to1.Dev.PackageOperation(projectID, operation, package, options?);
9to1.Dev.GetDiff(scope, comparison, options?);
9to1.Dev.GetAIChangeSet(changeSetID);
9to1.Dev.RevertAIChangeSet(changeSetID, options?);
9to1.Dev.OpenPreview(configurationID);
9to1.Dev.GetPreviewState(previewID);
9to1.Dev.CreateExtensionProject(config);
Shared Files, Stack, Terminal, NodeGraph, credentials and other domain operations use their owning namespaces where canonical.
Automation and events
Dev emits typed events such as WorkspaceOpened, ProjectCreated, FileChanged, DiagnosticsChanged, BuildStarted/Completed/Failed, TestRunCompleted, RunStarted/Stopped, DebugStarted/Stopped, ToolchainMissing/Changed, DependencyChanged, AIChangeSetCreated/Reviewed, PreviewUpdated/Failed and ExtensionHostStarted/Failed.
Automations/agents use stable resource IDs and meaningful lifecycle events rather than raw keypress/editor-caret telemetry.
Accessibility
Editor, project explorer, search, Problems, Test Explorer, debugger, source control/diffs, package/dependency views, terminal integrations, visual CUI builder, toolchain manager and AI review are keyboard operable and expose screen-reader semantics.
Diagnostics, breakpoints, source-control state, diff additions/deletions and build/test state MUST NOT rely only on colour/gutter glyphs.
Visual builder/preview functionality provides source/tree/Inspector alternatives so required project editing does not depend solely on pointer manipulation.
Performance and large-workspace behaviour
Dev uses lazy/incremental workspace indexing, incremental parsing, bounded caches, cancellation, virtualised large lists and project ignore/exclusion rules. Vendor/generated/build directories are not fully indexed by default when the project/provider marks them as such.
Opening a large monorepo MUST NOT synchronously parse millions of files on the UI thread. Tooling status/progress is visible and expensive indexing can be cancelled or scoped.
Large-file mode reduces expensive semantic/decorative features instead of freezing the editor.
Recovery and failure behaviour
Unsaved editor changes, editor layout and recoverable workspace state survive crashes where feasible. File saves use safe/atomic behaviour appropriate to the backing filesystem/provider.
Failed AI or bulk refactors preserve a recoverable change set and MUST NOT report completion when only part of a requested patch applied. Conflicts are surfaced explicitly.
Structured failures include WorkspaceNotFound, ProjectNotFound, FileNotFound, ToolchainMissing, ToolchainVersionMismatch, LanguageServiceUnavailable, BuildFailed, TestFailed, DebuggerUnavailable, RunConfigurationInvalid, PackageRestoreFailed, PackageAuthenticationRequired, ExtensionHostFailed, PreviewBuildFailed, VMProviderUnavailable, EnvironmentUnavailable, RevisionConflict, PermissionDenied and CapabilityUnavailable plus provider-specific diagnostics.
Platform capability behaviour
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical Dev project/workspace/action models while capability-negotiating local compiler availability, process execution, VM acceleration, terminal/debugger integration, filesystem access, extension hosting and remote environments.
Where a platform cannot provide a capability locally, Dev exposes CapabilityUnavailable or uses an explicitly configured remote/service provider. It MUST NOT silently pretend a build/debug/run occurred on an unsupported target.
When Home is absent at process start, Dev follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract.
Acceptance requirements
Dev is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
A representative multi-file workspace/project opens, edits and saves source while preserving project/file identity.
New Project can filter/select a language/project type/framework and refuses or warns clearly when its required toolchain is unavailable.
A 9to1 Extension project can select at least two target apps, generate corresponding manifest/contribution scaffolding and launch an appropriate Extension Host.
Representative C#/.NET, C/C++ and Python projects resolve the correct configured SDK/compiler/runtime and show a precise missing/wrong-version state when unavailable.
A real build pipeline exposes stage-level restore/compile/link/package/test state and maps compiler diagnostics into Problems.
Run launches the declared target rather than assuming every project is a host executable.
An OS/kernel project can build a boot artifact and launch it through a configured VM provider with display/serial output; unsupported VM acceleration/provider state is reported clearly.
Debugger breakpoints, stepping, call stack, variables and evaluation work for representative supported language/provider combinations.
Test Explorer can run one test and a suite, preserves stable test/result identity and exposes failure source/output.
LSP/provider completion, definition, references and semantic rename work for a representative supported language.
Semantic refactor uses the language provider rather than global text replacement.
Terminal integration uses the shared terminal runtime and respects the selected environment/project working directory.
Stack/source-control state and file/hunk diffs match the actual repository state.
An AI multi-file edit creates a distinct AIChangeSet whose diff excludes unrelated pre-existing user edits.
AI review can accept/reject at least file/hunk level and Revert AI Change preserves unrelated overlapping user work or surfaces a conflict instead of deleting it.
AI validation summaries only report build/tests actually executed.
NuGet package add/update/remove uses the real project/package manager and produces normal project/lockfile diffs; private feed credentials are not written into source.
At least one non-NuGet ecosystem package provider operates through the common Dependencies UI while retaining its native manifests/lockfiles.
Extension permissions are declared/inspectable, a crashing extension can be disabled/recovered without crash-looping Dev, and extension-host debugging works.
A Sites-compatible project can Open in Dev with stable source identity and use the declared preview pathway without export/import copying.
An AI Studio resource referenced by a project retains shared identity and can Open in AI Studio rather than being copied into an unrelated file.
Visual CUI Builder edits real CUI layout/property state bidirectionally with source and preserves unsupported code-defined constructs.
Code | Preview updates through hot reload where supported, preserves the last valid preview after a build failure and can map a representative rendered CUI element back to source.
A UI-oriented AI change can expose source diff plus visual/preview validation where the provider supports it.
Local and at least one remote/container environment use the same workspace/project model while executing toolchains/tasks in the selected environment.
Opening an untrusted workspace does not automatically execute project-controlled build/package/VM/extension code.
Secrets are not unnecessarily inserted into AI context/logs/diffs.
Large workspaces remain responsive through incremental indexing/virtualisation/cancellation.
Keyboard and screen-reader workflows cover editor navigation, Problems, tests, debugger, diff review and project creation.
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical Dev model while capability-negotiating unsupported local execution features.
When Home is absent at process start, Dev follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract.
Stacks
Product role
Stack is 9to1's team-first source-control and software-collaboration product. It is not a conventional GitHub clone or a desktop Git client. It combines Git hosting/collaboration with a higher-level project model designed for parallel team development, cascading shared frameworks, strong source-domain rules, public collaboration and deep integration with the rest of 9to1.
Donors
Primary donor: Gitea. Preserve mature donor features, quality-of-life behaviour and collaboration capabilities wherever they remain applicable, including repositories, users/teams, permissions, history/diffs, reviews, issues, releases, Git LFS, migration/mirroring and related backend features. Stack-specific behaviour replaces donor behaviour where the models conflict.
Secondary donor/reference: Gitnuro may be used for local desktop Git workflows and UX patterns where useful.
Donor parity must be explicitly audited. Every mature donor feature must be preserved, replaced by a 9to1-native equivalent, or explicitly recorded as not applicable.
Project and storage model
Each Stack project is an independent project boundary. A Stack project may use:
9to1 Files as the source backing store;
its own dedicated public or private GitHub repository;
both Files and GitHub together, according to the user's configuration.
Stack must never combine unrelated Stack projects into one shared repository.
Public Stack projects MUST expose a dedicated user-facing source-browsing, forking and contribution interface. Normal participation MUST NOT require direct access to Stack-managed backing folders, manifests or dependency branches.
Stack supports mixed public/private project components through an explicit visibility model attached to canonical resources/domains. Public projection is generated only from resources whose effective visibility permits publication; private files, objects, commits, credentials, metadata and historical objects MUST be excluded from the public Git/source projection, not merely hidden in the UI. Before publishing or mirroring a mixed-visibility project, Stack MUST validate the projected commit/object graph and block publication if private ancestry/content would be reachable.
Startup and app shell
Stack has two startup modes:
New Session: open Home.
Last State: restore the previous tabs and navigation state.
If Last State would reopen a tab/state that is known to have caused a repeatable crash, Stack must suppress or close the offending tab rather than crash-loop.
Stack always uses a tabbed interface:
←  →  |  🏠  |  Project Tab 1  |  Project Tab 2  |  +
Home is permanently available as the leftmost tab. Opening a project opens a new tab. The + button opens a new tab.
Home contains the main dashboard and its own sidebar pages, including My Projects, Discover Projects, Audit Log, My Team, Settings and similar administration/discovery surfaces. These pages stay inside Home rather than becoming separate top-level app tabs.
Clicking Home while Home is already selected returns Home to the main dashboard.
Back/Forward arrows sit to the left of Home and navigate history inside the currently selected tab. Unavailable navigation buttons are disabled/greyed.
Source lineage
main is a special top-level source root and is above all normal Branches.
main may contain normal project source and Roots. main may NEVER contain Twigs, Leaves or Subroots.
Normal development follows:
main
└─ Branch
   └─ Twig
      └─ Leaf
A Branch is broadly analogous to a Git branch.
A Twig is a nested development domain beneath a Branch.
A Leaf is a nested development domain beneath a Twig.
Stack does not use worktrees as its user-facing or internal parallel-development model.
Example:
main
└─ 9to1 2027 Q1 Update
   ├─ Write
   │  ├─ New Font Switcher
   │  ├─ Editor 2.0
   │  └─ Persistent Word Counter
   ├─ Present
   └─ Data 2.0
Cascade semantics
Inheritance cascades downward by default:
main → Branch → Twig → Leaf.
Changes committed to main automatically cascade into every Branch and then through descendants.
Changes made at a Branch cascade into its Twigs and Leaves.
This allows shared frameworks/donor changes to be implemented once at a higher domain rather than duplicated in every child.
If a cascade conflicts with descendant work, propagation for the affected path/node pauses until the conflict is resolved.
The effective source state of a Twig/Leaf is its own changes combined with inherited state from its ancestors.
Deletion and rename semantics must be represented explicitly so inherited files do not incorrectly reappear after a child intentionally deletes or renames them.
Active domain
Users do not switch branches in the traditional Git sense.
Right-clicking any Branch/Twig/Leaf exposes Set Active.
The active domain is only the default context used when opening an editor, running tests or building the project.
Other Branches/Twigs/Leaves remain browseable and actionable at all times and can expose actions such as Open in Editor or Build without requiring the user to stash changes or change the active domain.
If no Branch/Twig/Leaf is active, main becomes active automatically.
Project sidebar
A project shows its whole lineage as one collapsible tree rather than hiding branches behind a branch selector:
Project
└─ Branches
   └─ Branch (+A -D)
      └─ Twigs
         └─ Twig (+A -D)
            └─ Leaves
               └─ Leaf (+A -D)
Project, Branches, Twigs and Leaves are collapsible headers.
Every Branch/Twig/Leaf label shows live diff totals, for example:
Notes Overhaul (+90 -20)
Displayed +A/-D totals MUST represent only the delta owned by that node relative to its effective parent. Inherited ancestor changes MUST NOT increase a child node’s own displayed totals.
Selecting a node shows its effective source plus the node's diff against its parent. Changed filenames are visually status-coded, including green for additions/positive changes and red for removals/deletions, with clear states for renames and conflicts. Diff entries show the affected path and exact file/location.
Local and remote state
Uncommitted/unpushed changes appear at the top of a node's change view in bold with a yellow up-arrow.
Committed changes appear underneath.
Any Branch/Twig/Leaf containing uncommitted/unpushed changes also shows the yellow up-arrow beside its tree label.
A user setting can change this view to show only uncommitted/unpushed changes.
If changes exist on the remote but not the current machine, show a yellow cloud icon beside the node.
If remote and local changes conflict, the cloud turns red.
Conflict handling
When a conflict is detected, Stack opens a popup listing the conflicting filenames.
View details opens the exact conflicting hunks/locations.
Summarise with AI sends the relevant conflict context to Dulche/Home and returns a plain-language summary of the conflict.
Fix with AI asks Dulche to produce a resolution through typed source-control actions rather than opaque UI automation.
After an AI fix, Stack presents:
a summary of what Dulche changed;
the resulting diff;
Reject;
Accept and Merge ▼.
The dropdown under Accept and Merge contains Accept without Merging.
Reject restores the pre-fix state.
Accept without Merging keeps the resolved changes but does not complete the merge.
Accept and Merge accepts the resolution and completes the merge.
AI conflict resolutions must never silently merge without this explicit review step.
Roots
A Root means: this file/folder/domain is structurally important and locked in Stack.
Root state is stored in roots.json in the owning domain. Domain means main, Branch, Twig or Leaf.
All files/paths listed in that domain's roots.json are locked by Stack according to Root rules.
A Root is authoritative for descendants: child domains cannot edit, replace or override the protected content directly.
Roots represent authoritative shared frameworks, donor source or other protected components. Unless changed through the Root/Subroot workflow, Root content MUST cascade unchanged into descendant domains and descendants MUST NOT override it directly.
A Root may exist in main or another domain.
Root enforcement must derive from stored metadata, not only from transient UI state.
Freeze
Freeze is different from Root.
Root means “important/authoritative; direct editing below this domain is not allowed.”
Freeze means “out of scope for now.”
When creating a Freeze, the user chooses exactly which descendant subdomains inherit the Freeze. It does not automatically apply to every child unless selected.
A Freeze may have an expiry point/time/condition after which editing is restored automatically.
Stack must clearly show:
that a file/domain is frozen;
which descendants the Freeze applies to;
when it expires, if applicable.
Freeze lifecycle is explicit. A Freeze records stable FreezeID, target Root/resource/domain, selected descendant scope, creator, reason, creation revision, optional expiry/condition and state. New descendants inherit an active Freeze only when they fall inside its configured scope policy. Early thaw requires the configured Freeze-management permission and is audited. Automatic expiry transitions the Freeze to Expired and restores editability only after Stack checks for in-progress operations and reconciles queued upstream changes. A user without Freeze-management permission cannot override or bypass an active Freeze.
Subroots
A Subroot is the controlled mechanism for testing changes to Root files.
Subroots sit in the same domain that owns the Root, for example:
Twig
└─ Twig Subroots
A Subroot explicitly selects which Roots are in scope.
Each Root file/folder can be included in only one active Subroot at a time within that domain. Stack must prevent overlapping Subroots from claiming the same Root.
Root changes are developed/tested through the Subroot rather than by directly editing protected descendant copies.
main can contain Roots but can NEVER contain Subroots.
Subroot completion is a first-class reviewed operation. Completing a Subroot requires a diff against the owning Root, configured validation/check results, conflict resolution and the required approvals. On completion the accepted change is applied to the owning Root as one auditable Root update, descendants receive it through normal cascade semantics, and the Subroot releases its Root claims. The user may instead abandon the Subroot, which discards its proposed Root changes while preserving audit/history. A Subroot cannot be silently deleted while it owns unresolved changes or Root claims.
Files-backed storage
For Files-backed projects, Stack uses explicit Stack-managed dot folders:
Project Name/
├─ .git/
├─ .branches/
│  └─ Branch/
│     └─ nested Stack structure
├─ .source/
│  └─ project source tree
└─ .roots/
   └─ roots.json
Leading-dot paths are Stack-managed infrastructure. The UI MUST identify them as managed/internal state and MUST prevent ordinary project-editing flows from casually deleting or editing them. Explicit diagnostic/recovery tooling MAY expose controlled access.
The exact nested on-disk schema for Branch/Twig/Leaf/Subroot domains and their per-domain metadata must be versioned and documented.
Stack MUST validate its managed folders/manifests when opening/synchronising a project. If required infrastructure is missing, moved, altered or partially deleted, Stack MUST enter a recoverable/diagnostic state, identify the damaged objects and attempt deterministic reconstruction from retained metadata/object IDs where reconstruction is possible; it MUST NOT silently treat damaged infrastructure as ordinary project source.
GitHub-backed storage
Each Stack project using GitHub maps to its own dedicated GitHub repository.
Normal Stack Branches remain normal native Git branches in that repository.
Twigs, Leaves and Subroot state are not represented as a proliferation of independent Git branches.
Stack stores Twig/Leaf/Subroot nested state in protected Stack-managed companion storage in the same repository. The canonical Git ref for that companion branch is `stack/twigs-and-leaves-dependency`; the UI presents it as managed infrastructure (for example “Twigs and Leaves (DEPENDENCY)”) and MUST NOT expose it as an ordinary user Branch.
This dependency branch is never surfaced as a normal Branch inside Stack. Stack interprets it and renders the actual Branch → Twig → Leaf hierarchy.
The dependency branch must contain a prominent README explaining that it is Stack-managed infrastructure and must not be deleted, merged into normal branches, rebased, renamed or manually edited.
It must also contain a Stack manifest/schema sufficient to identify the project, version the storage format, map Branch/Twig/Leaf/Subroot IDs and recover safely.
If the dependency tree/manifest appears in a normal branch because somebody merged or moved it, Stack must recognise the signature, warn the user and recover/relink the dependency branch where possible rather than treating those files as normal project source.
If the dependency branch is deleted, Stack MUST detect the missing managed ref and MUST attempt reconstruction from retained commit/object IDs, manifests and configured Files-backed recovery metadata. If complete reconstruction is impossible, Stack MUST preserve recoverable evidence, identify unrecoverable objects explicitly and block unsafe writes that could overwrite remaining recovery state.
The GitHub adapter MUST preserve Stack semantics rather than mirror the Files backing layout literally. Branches map to native Git branches; Twig/Leaf/Subroot state maps to the protected Stack companion branch/manifest model defined above. Other entities MUST use a native GitHub/Git construct only when that construct preserves the canonical Stack identity, permissions and lifecycle semantics; otherwise Stack-managed metadata remains authoritative.
Sweeping and pruning
Sweep collects the changes from all descendant Twigs/Leaves into the owning Branch root, then removes those descendant development domains.
Prune removes/discards a Stack Branch and its descendants from Stack.
Prune requires 2FA.
main can never be pruned.
Pruning must not immediately destroy the backing source. The underlying Files/GitHub data must remain recoverable/auditable according to the project's retention policy.
Individual Twigs and Leaves can also be removed independently.
Pruned domains enter a recoverable Deleted state for the project's configured retention period. Restore reactivates the same stable DomainID and backing references when their retained source objects remain valid. Permanent purge is a separate privileged operation, requires explicit confirmation and 2FA for protected project policies, and is blocked while retained objects are referenced by active descendants, releases, change requests, audit requirements or recovery points. Purge records what was removed and what immutable audit evidence remains.
Public collaboration
Public Stack projects expose a dedicated Stack interface for source browsing, forks and contributions rather than forcing users into internal Files storage.
Public projects provide project profiles, source browsing, history/releases, contributor identity, forks, Change Requests, notifications and Discover integration. Moderation supports project-level roles, report/block actions and removal of abusive public content without rewriting unrelated source history. Forks receive independent ProjectID/repository identity and record their source-project provenance. Contributions return through Change Requests against an explicitly selected destination domain; contributors never receive implicit access to private project components or Stack-managed dependency storage.
Where project components have different public/private visibility, Stack must preserve hard security boundaries and never rely on UI hiding.
Sites integration
Stack is closely integrated with Sites.
At minimum, Sites must be able to use Stack projects as source projects, open the relevant source domain, and maintain source ownership/history rather than publishing opaque generated output.
Sites binds deployments/previews to exact Stack ProjectID, DomainID and source revision. Branch/Twig/Leaf domains may create isolated preview deployments where policy permits; production deployments default to an approved Main revision unless the project explicitly authorises another release source. Build/deployment status is attached to the exact revision. Sites edits to source-backed projects are committed back into the currently bound Stack domain as ordinary reviewable source changes; Sites MUST NOT maintain an anonymous divergent copy of the project.
Gitea/Gitnuro donor parity
Gitea is the primary donor and must be forked from the latest appropriate source at implementation time.
Gitnuro may be used as a secondary donor/reference for local Git UX where its licence and architecture permit.
Donor parity must cover, where applicable:
repositories and repository settings;
users, organisations/teams and permissions;
commit history, branches, tags and diffs;
reviews/pull-request-equivalent workflows;
issues, milestones and project-management integration;
releases;
Git LFS;
import/migration and mirroring;
webhooks/integration surfaces;
CI/build automation donor capabilities;
package/release distribution capabilities;
audit/activity history;
search;
mature donor QoL and recovery behaviour.
A feature may only be omitted when Stack deliberately replaces it or records it as not applicable.
Domain identity and effective source
Every source domain has stable DomainID, ProjectID, type (Main, Branch, Twig or Leaf), parent DomainID where applicable, name, creation/base revision, local revision, effective revision, state, visibility, permission policy and Revision. Renaming or moving display labels MUST NOT change identity.
Effective source is a deterministic projection of the domain's inherited ancestor state plus the domain's own deltas, tombstones, renames and Root/Freeze/Subroot rules. For a Leaf, the conceptual order is Main baseline → Branch delta → Twig delta → Leaf delta.
Each effective file/resource can expose lineage: originating ancestor/domain, inherited revision, local override/delta, rename/delete state, Root authority and any paused/conflicted cascade. View lineage MUST use canonical history rather than infer origin from current path text.
Domain creation, hierarchy guards and reparenting
Hierarchy is enforced by the model/API: Main may create Branches; a Branch may create Twigs; a Twig may create Leaves; a Leaf cannot create children. Main cannot be a child and cannot contain Twigs, Leaves or Subroots.
Creating a child records its exact parent/base effective revision. Later parent changes arrive through cascade processing; the recorded base remains available for history, review and conflict calculation.
Reparenting is not a rename. Moving a Twig to another Branch or a Leaf to another Twig requires an explicit Reparent operation that calculates the new base/effective source, previews conflicts, preserves stable DomainID/history and requires the configured permission. Cross-project reparenting is prohibited; use fork/import/migration workflows instead.
Deletion of a parent with active descendants is blocked unless the operation explicitly archives/prunes/migrates the descendants under the corresponding lifecycle rules.
Materialisation and concurrency model
Stack MUST support opening, browsing, building and acting on multiple domains concurrently without requiring user-facing Git worktree switching. Each active execution/editor receives a domain-scoped materialised view produced from canonical effective source.
Implementations MAY use overlay filesystems, virtual projections, content-addressed materialisation, temporary isolated checkout directories or another robust mechanism, but the materialisation is derived state and MUST NOT become a competing source of truth.
Concurrent writes target stable DomainID/resource identity. Two clients or agents editing the same domain/resource use revision/merge conflict semantics; isolated domains may proceed independently. A failed materialisation or cache rebuild MUST be recoverable from canonical Stack/Git/Files state.
Commit history for Branches, Twigs, Leaves and Subroots
Branches use normal native Git commit history where Git-backed. Twig/Leaf/Subroot changes also have ordered canonical Change/Commit records with stable IDs, parent revision, author/initiator, timestamp, message, affected resources and resulting domain revision.
When GitHub-backed, Twig/Leaf/Subroot commit objects are represented through the protected Stack companion storage/manifest so their history is durable without exposing each nested domain as a normal Git branch. The manifest maps stable Stack change IDs to retained Git object/content identities sufficient for reconstruction.
History for a domain distinguishes inherited ancestor changes from locally authored changes. Rewriting or squashing history is explicit and permission-controlled; it MUST NOT silently invalidate descendants, releases or open Change Requests.
Promotion and Change Requests
Normal contribution flow is Leaf → parent Twig → parent Branch → Main. Promotion is explicit upward movement of a reviewed change set; downward inheritance remains the separate cascade mechanism.
A ChangeRequest has stable ChangeRequestID, source DomainID/revision, destination DomainID/revision, included changes/commits, diff, author, reviewers, comments, required checks, approvals, conflict state, policy state, outcome and resulting revision.
Promote from a Leaf normally targets its parent Twig; from a Twig its parent Branch; from a Branch Main. Project policy MAY allow a deliberate bypass, but the UI/API must state which levels are being bypassed, calculate the complete destination diff and record the bypass in audit history.
Promotion never silently includes unrelated descendant or working-tree changes. The source revision being reviewed is pinned. New source edits after review begins create a new revision and invalidate/re-run configured approvals/checks as policy requires.
Completing a Change Request applies the accepted change to the destination, records resulting lineage, then normal cascade semantics propagate the destination update downward. The source domain may remain open, be marked completed or be swept/pruned according to user/project policy.
Review, approvals and merge strategy
Change Requests support threaded review comments, requested changes, approvals, assigned reviewers, CODEOWNERS/ownership-style policies where configured, check requirements and protected-domain rules.
Available integration strategies may include merge commit, fast-forward, rebase or squash only where the target/domain policy and Stack lineage model can preserve stable identity and ancestry. The chosen strategy is explicit in the Change Request outcome.
Protected Main/Branch domains can require approvals, passing checks, signed commits or designated maintainers before promotion. An administrator override, where policy permits it, is explicit and audited.
Cascade implementation and update state
Automatic Main/Branch cascade is represented as canonical ancestor revisions applied to descendant effective-source state, not as an uncontrolled series of user-visible Git merges. Each descendant tracks the highest ancestor revision successfully incorporated for each relevant lineage.
When an ancestor changes, Stack computes the descendant update. Non-conflicting inherited changes become part of effective source automatically; locally owned +A/-D totals remain unchanged. If a resource conflicts, cascade for that affected resource/path pauses and the descendant records UpstreamConflict while unrelated safe updates MAY continue.
Users can inspect pending/inherited upstream changes and the ancestor revisions that caused them. Cascade processing is idempotent and crash-resumable.
Deletion, rename and tombstone inheritance
A descendant deletion is represented as a tombstone bound to canonical resource lineage, not mere physical absence. The tombstone prevents the deleted ancestor resource from reappearing when a later cascade occurs.
Renames/moves preserve stable resource lineage where deterministically known, storing old/new path plus resource identity. A later ancestor edit to the pre-rename resource is mapped to the renamed descendant resource when lineage proves equivalence; ambiguous cases surface a conflict.
Replacing a resource with an unrelated new resource at the same path creates new lineage rather than pretending it is the old object. Tombstones and rename metadata are versioned and included in recovery/migration.
Conflict objects and resolver
Every unresolved conflict is a structured Conflict object with stable ConflictID, ProjectID/DomainID, resource identity/path, base revision/content, upstream side, local side, conflicting regions/properties, lineage, origin operation, state, assigned resolver where applicable and Revision.
Text/code conflict resolution supports three-way views such as Upstream | Result | Local, hunk/region selection, take upstream, take local, combine/edit result, accept all non-conflicting changes and Open in Dev. Structured 9to1 resources SHOULD use semantic conflict resolution when a canonical domain API can represent it faithfully.
Dulche may Summarise or propose Fix with AI through typed actions. AI proposals remain reviewable diffs; Reject restores the pre-proposal resolution state, Accept without Merging stores the resolution, and Accept and Merge completes the pending operation only after explicit user approval.
Root authority model
Root records have stable RootID, owning DomainID, protected resource identities/paths, creation revision, state, provenance/reason, policy and Revision. Root enforcement comes from canonical metadata; roots.json is a persisted projection/manifest, not the only source of truth.
A Root locks descendant override of the protected resource. The owning domain may update its Root through authorised Root workflows, after which descendants inherit the new authoritative state through normal cascade rules.
Root scope may include a file, folder or registered structured resource. Overlapping Root definitions are validated so ownership is deterministic.
Subroot lifecycle
A Subroot is a controlled experimental/update workspace for one or more Roots owned by the same eligible non-Main domain. It has stable SubrootID, owning DomainID, claimed RootIDs, base Root revisions, local proposed changes, checks/review state and lifecycle state.
Within one owning domain, a Root can belong to only one active Subroot at a time. Main can contain Roots but cannot contain Subroots.
Completing a Subroot requires a diff against the owning Root, required tests/checks, conflict resolution and configured approvals. Accepted changes update the owning Root atomically as an auditable Root revision, release the claims and cascade to descendants. Abandoning a Subroot discards the proposal while retaining history/audit. Subroots with unresolved changes/claims cannot be silently deleted.
Freeze lifecycle and permissions
A Freeze is a scoped edit restriction, distinct from Root authority. Freeze records have stable FreezeID, target resource/domain, selected descendant scope, creator, reason, creation revision, optional expiry/condition, policy and state.
New descendants inherit an active Freeze only according to its declared scope policy. Early thaw requires Freeze-management permission and is audited. Automatic expiry moves the Freeze to Expired and restores editability after checking in-progress operations and reconciling queued upstream updates.
Users without Freeze-management permission cannot bypass a Freeze through API, raw Git adapter or alternate client. Emergency administrator override, if enabled by organisation policy, is explicit, requires strong confirmation and is audited.
Files and GitHub dual-authority/synchronisation
When only Files backing is enabled, Files/Stack canonical metadata and source are authoritative. When only GitHub backing is enabled, native Git state plus protected Stack metadata are authoritative according to the adapter contract.
When both Files and GitHub are enabled, the project config explicitly selects authority mode: Stack/Files primary with GitHub mirror, GitHub primary with Files cache/backup, or managed bidirectional synchronisation. Bidirectional mode uses stable object/revision mapping and MUST surface concurrent divergent edits as sync conflicts; last-writer-wins is not an acceptable default.
Each successful sync records source revision, destination revision and mapping checkpoint. Partial sync leaves a resumable SyncConflict/Failed state and MUST NOT claim both backends are current.
Credentials and private remote metadata use shared credential/security infrastructure rather than being stored in project source.
Git compatibility and advanced Git operations
Git remains an interoperable underlying source-control substrate. Stack supports commit, stage/unstage where relevant, fetch, pull/synchronise, push, revert, cherry-pick, tags, signed commits, history, blame, diff, Git LFS, import/migration and mirrors where compatible.
Raw Git operations that would invalidate Stack-managed lineage, dependency refs or Root/Subroot metadata are blocked or routed through an explicit Advanced/Unmanaged operation that explains consequences and repairs/reconciles Stack metadata before normal work resumes.
Checking out an arbitrary Git branch inside a Stack-managed materialisation MUST NOT silently change the active Stack DomainID. Active domain is controlled by Stack's typed SetActive/OpenDomain operations.
Mixed public/private projection
Visibility is attached to canonical domains/resources and inherited according to explicit policy. Public projection includes only content and history proven public for the selected release/domain projection.
Before public GitHub mirroring, forking or source browsing, Stack validates the projected tree and reachable object/history graph. If private content, credentials, private commit ancestry or private Stack metadata would be reachable, publication is blocked until the exposure is resolved.
Changing a resource from public to private does not retroactively erase already-published Git history. Stack warns when historical exposure exists and offers supported remediation/rewrite workflows without pretending the previous public data was never published.
Team permissions and sensitive operations
Permissions can be set at organisation/project and, where needed, domain level. Core roles/capabilities cover view source, contribute, create child domains, commit, promote/create Change Requests, review/approve, manage Roots/Subroots, manage Freezes, manage releases/packages, administer visibility/remotes and prune/purge.
Child-domain permissions inherit from parent policy unless an explicit narrower override is allowed. A child MUST NOT grant broader access to private ancestor material than the parent/project permits.
Sensitive operations such as permanent purge, private→public exposure, protected-domain override, remote replacement and destructive Root history rewrite require elevated permission and stronger confirmation; project policy MAY require 2FA.
CI, build and test checks
Branches, Twigs and Leaves can run revision-pinned checks supplied by Dev, Automations or configured CI providers. CheckRun records provider, source DomainID/revision, workflow/config revision, status, logs/artifacts references and conclusion.
Change Requests show required and optional checks. Protected destinations can require successful build/test/lint/security/package checks before promotion. A check result from an older source revision MUST NOT satisfy a requirement for a newer reviewed revision.
Checks run against the exact effective source of the target domain, including inherited ancestor state, not merely that domain's local delta.
Releases, tags and packages
Release normally targets an approved Main revision. Project policy MAY permit another explicitly selected stable domain/revision, but the Release records its exact source identity and does not float with later domain changes.
Release has stable ReleaseID, source ProjectID/DomainID/revision, tag/version, notes, artifacts, checks, publisher, visibility and publication state. Tags map to immutable source revisions unless an explicit privileged retag operation is performed and audited.
Package/release distribution capabilities inherited from Gitea or shared 9to1 package infrastructure remain available where applicable. Packages record project, version, source/release revision, publisher, permissions and registry metadata so Dev can consume configured private/public feeds.
GitHub mirroring, backup and restore
GitHub mirroring/backup records mirror configuration, last successful checkpoint and source/destination revisions. A mirror is never treated as current merely because the remote exists.
Restore can rebuild Stack state from the authoritative Git repository plus protected Stack manifests/object mappings and configured Files recovery metadata. Missing companion refs are reconstructed from retained object IDs when possible.
If complete reconstruction is impossible, Stack preserves available source/history, marks exact Domains/Roots/Subroots/changes that cannot be recovered and blocks writes that would destroy remaining recovery evidence. It MUST NOT fabricate successful restoration.
Sites and Dev integration
Sites deployments/previews bind to exact Stack ProjectID, DomainID and revision. Branch/Twig/Leaf preview deployments are isolated where policy permits; production defaults to an approved Main release/revision unless explicitly configured otherwise.
Sites source edits are written back as normal changes in the bound Stack domain and become visible in diff/history/Change Requests. Sites MUST NOT maintain a hidden divergent source copy.
Open in Dev opens the exact Stack domain/materialised effective source and provides ProjectID/DomainID/revision context. Dev edits become local Stack changes in that domain. Builds/tests/diffs shown in Stack and Dev reference the same canonical revision identities.
Issues and Boards integration
Stack preserves source-oriented Issues, labels, milestones and repository issue workflows required by donor parity. Issues may link to commits, domains, Change Requests, releases and affected paths/resources.
Boards owns richer planning/project-management workflows. Stack can create/link a Board card from an Issue and show linked Board state, while Boards can reference Stack issues/changes. The products MUST NOT silently duplicate and diverge two full project-management databases.
Automations and webhooks
Stack exposes typed triggers/actions for project/domain/change/review/release lifecycle through Automations. Webhooks/integrations can subscribe to events such as push/change committed, domain created/completed, Change Request opened/updated/merged, check completed, release published and issue changed.
Webhook payloads expose stable IDs and permission-scoped data. Delivery has retry/idempotency identifiers and observable failure state; a failed webhook MUST NOT roll back an already-completed source operation unless an explicit transactional integration contract exists.
Public discovery, contributions and moderation
Public projects expose profile, source/history/releases, contributors, forks, Change Requests and Discover integration without exposing Stack-managed internal storage.
Forking creates independent ProjectID/repository identity and records source-project provenance. Contributions return through a Change Request against an explicitly selected public destination domain and do not grant access to private components.
Moderation includes report/block capabilities, project-maintainer controls and platform policy enforcement for public-facing content. Moderation actions affecting source visibility/history are explicit and audited.
Sweep, prune, retention and purge
Sweep previews the descendant domains and changes to be consolidated into the owning Branch, verifies conflicts/checks as configured, applies accepted descendant changes to the Branch and only then marks/removes completed descendant development domains. It MUST NOT discard unmerged descendant work silently.
Prune removes a Branch/Twig/Leaf from active Stack navigation and requires the configured permission; protected project policy can require 2FA. Main can never be pruned.
Pruned domains enter recoverable Deleted state for the configured retention period. Restore reactivates the same stable DomainID/backing references where retained objects remain valid.
Permanent purge is a separate privileged operation and is blocked while retained objects are referenced by active descendants, releases, Change Requests, audit requirements or recovery points. Purge records what source/metadata was removed and what immutable audit evidence remains.
Audit log
Audit coverage includes project creation/deletion/settings, domain create/reparent/archive/prune/restore/purge, commits and sync/push/fetch operations, Change Requests, approvals/overrides, conflicts and resolutions, Root/Subroot/Freeze lifecycle, permission/visibility changes, public projection, remote/mirror changes, releases/packages, CI/check state changes, moderation actions, autocommit actions and AI-authored actions.
Audit entries identify actor/initiator, stable target IDs, timestamp, operation type, relevant before/after revisions, outcome and linked recovery/change request where applicable. Sensitive values such as credentials are never logged.
Large repositories, binary data and LFS
Repository browsing/history/diff uses virtualisation, paging and lazy content loading for large trees/histories. Stack MUST NOT materialise every domain or download every large object merely to open a project.
Binary files display metadata/history and binary-aware replacement state rather than bogus line diffs. Git LFS or an equivalent configured large-object backend is preserved where applicable; pointer/object availability is validated before claiming a domain/release is complete.
Large-object quota/provider failures surface typed errors and do not silently replace missing binaries with empty files.
Metadata schema migration and disaster recovery
Stack-managed manifests and companion storage use explicit schema versions. Upgrades run idempotent migrations with pre-migration recovery checkpoints where feasible and never rewrite unknown/newer schema versions as if understood.
A migration failure leaves the previous recoverable state and marks the project NeedsMigration/Recovery rather than partially continuing normal writes.
Disaster recovery documentation and APIs cover loss/corruption of local materialisations, Files backing, GitHub companion ref, metadata manifests and sync checkpoints. Recovery prioritises canonical source/history and stable IDs, reports unrecoverable state precisely and never fabricates missing commits/resources.
Dulche and AI-assisted source control
Dulche context includes ProjectID, active/selected DomainID, ancestry/effective revisions, local/inherited changes, Roots/Subroots/Freezes, conflicts, Change Requests, checks, releases and permissions.
Examples include explaining why a file differs from Main, summarising a Twig's owned changes, creating a Leaf for a task, proposing a conflict resolution and preparing a domain for promotion.
AI source mutations, conflict fixes, commits, domain creation and review actions use typed Stack/Dev/Files APIs. AI MUST NOT manipulate Stack-managed companion branches/folders through opaque shell/UI automation when a semantic action exists.
AI claims about build/test/review readiness must reference actual executed check results for the pinned revision.
Stack API
Stack's first-party API catalogue is exhaustive under the global API-parity rule. Minimum canonical entry points include:
9to1.Stack.CreateProject(config);
9to1.Stack.OpenProject(projectID);
9to1.Stack.CreateBranch(projectID, config);
9to1.Stack.CreateTwig(branchID, config);
9to1.Stack.CreateLeaf(twigID, config);
9to1.Stack.SetActiveDomain(projectID, domainID);
9to1.Stack.GetDomain(domainID);
9to1.Stack.GetEffectiveTree(domainID, options?);
9to1.Stack.GetLineage(domainID, resourceIDOrPath);
9to1.Stack.GetDomainChanges(domainID, options?);
9to1.Stack.GetUpstreamChanges(domainID, options?);
9to1.Stack.SyncDomain(domainID, options?);
9to1.Stack.CreateCommit(domainID, changeSelection, message, options?);
9to1.Stack.Push(domainID, options?);
9to1.Stack.Fetch(projectID, options?);
9to1.Stack.ReparentDomain(domainID, newParentID, options?);
9to1.Stack.CreateChangeRequest(sourceDomainID, destinationDomainID, options?);
9to1.Stack.ReviewChangeRequest(changeRequestID, review);
9to1.Stack.ApproveChangeRequest(changeRequestID, options?);
9to1.Stack.MergeChangeRequest(changeRequestID, strategy, options?);
9to1.Stack.Promote(domainID, options?);
9to1.Stack.GetConflicts(scope);
9to1.Stack.ResolveConflict(conflictID, resolution, options?);
9to1.Stack.CreateRoot(domainID, resources, config?);
9to1.Stack.UpdateRoot(rootID, changeSet, options?);
9to1.Stack.CreateSubroot(domainID, rootIDs, config?);
9to1.Stack.CompleteSubroot(subrootID, options?);
9to1.Stack.AbandonSubroot(subrootID, options?);
9to1.Stack.CreateFreeze(target, scope, config?);
9to1.Stack.ThawFreeze(freezeID, options?);
9to1.Stack.CreateRelease(projectID, sourceRevision, config);
9to1.Stack.Sweep(branchID, options?);
9to1.Stack.Prune(domainID, options?);
9to1.Stack.RestorePruned(domainID, options?);
9to1.Stack.Purge(domainID, options?);
9to1.Stack.ConfigureAutocommit(domainID, config);
Generic Files, identity, credentials, Boards, Sites and Dev operations use their owning namespaces where canonical.
Autocommit
Autocommit is disabled by default and must be enabled explicitly per repository/domain. It supports a configured elapsed interval or inactivity duration; settings may display friendly minutes while runtime stores precise duration.
Autocommit detects eligible changes, excludes ignored/prohibited/known-secret material according to project security rules, refuses to run across unresolved conflicts, creates a normal canonical commit with an inspectable message/change selection and records the operation in audit history.
Two policies are distinct: Autocommit locally only, and Autocommit + sync remote. Remote synchronisation occurs only when enabled and permitted. Failed push/sync leaves the commit local with explicit Ahead/SyncFailed state; Stack MUST NOT claim the domain is synced.
Autocommit can be disabled for individual repositories/domains even when enabled at a broader user/workspace level.
Accessibility
Project/domain tree, change lists, diffs, conflict resolver, Change Requests, reviews, Root/Subroot/Freeze controls, releases and audit views are keyboard operable and expose screen-reader semantics.
Addition/deletion/conflict/upstream/local/remote states MUST NOT rely only on colour or icons. +A/-D counts, status text and accessible descriptions identify state.
Three-way conflict and diff views provide line/hunk navigation and textual descriptions usable without pointer-only interaction.
Performance and resilience
Stack virtualises large trees, history, diffs, reviews and audit streams; expensive lineage/effective-source calculations are cached by revision and invalidated deterministically.
Cascade, sync, Sweep, large Change Request checks, mirror operations and recovery run as cancellable/resumable jobs with stable JobID/progress/error state where applicable.
Crash/restart MUST not lose canonical domain metadata, pending conflict state or accepted commits. Derived materialisations/caches may be discarded and reconstructed.
Recovery and typed failures
Structured failures include ProjectNotFound, DomainNotFound, InvalidHierarchy, ReparentConflict, MaterialisationFailed, SourceCorrupt, ManagedMetadataMissing, SchemaVersionUnsupported, MigrationFailed, UpstreamConflict, ConflictUnresolved, RootLocked, RootClaimed, FreezeActive, ChangeRequestOutOfDate, RequiredCheckFailed, ApprovalRequired, SyncConflict, RemoteUnavailable, MirrorFailed, PrivateProjectionViolation, LFSObjectMissing, RestoreIncomplete, PurgeBlocked, RevisionConflict, PermissionDenied and CapabilityUnavailable plus provider-specific Git/Files errors.
Operations that partially affect external remotes or mirrors report exact completed/failed stages and preserve recovery checkpoints. Stack MUST NOT report rollback, restore, sync or merge success unless the resulting canonical and provider state was verified as required by that operation.
Platform capability behaviour
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical Project/Domain/Root/Subroot/Freeze/ChangeRequest model. Local materialisation, Git executable availability, filesystem semantics, credential providers and build integrations are capability-negotiated.
Where a platform cannot safely materialise or execute a local action, Stack uses an explicitly configured service/remote provider or reports CapabilityUnavailable; it MUST NOT silently change source-control semantics.
When Home is absent at process start, Stack follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract.
Acceptance requirements
Stack is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
A Main → Branch → Twig → Leaf hierarchy persists stable DomainIDs across rename/reopen and enforces legal parent/child types.
A child records its base revision and effective source correctly combines ancestor plus local deltas.
Opening/building two domains concurrently does not require user-facing worktree switching and does not mix their writes.
Local +A/-D counts exclude inherited ancestor changes, while upstream state remains inspectable.
A non-conflicting Main change cascades through Branch/Twig/Leaf effective source; a conflicting resource pauses only the affected cascade and creates a structured Conflict.
A descendant tombstone prevents a deliberately deleted inherited resource from reappearing after a later cascade.
A tracked rename preserves lineage across a subsequent ancestor edit or surfaces an explicit ambiguity conflict.
Leaf → Twig → Branch → Main promotion uses revision-pinned Change Requests, required approvals/checks and produces an auditable resulting revision.
A reviewed source revision changing after approval invalidates/re-runs policy as configured rather than merging unreviewed edits.
Conflict resolver supports manual three-way resolution and reviewed AI proposals with Reject, Accept without Merging and Accept and Merge semantics.
Root enforcement blocks descendant override while an authorised owning-domain Root update cascades normally.
A Subroot claims non-overlapping Roots, runs required review/checks, completes into the owning Root and releases its claims; Main cannot create Subroots.
Freeze applies only to configured descendant scope, cannot be bypassed by ordinary clients, and early/automatic thaw follows permissions/audit rules.
Files-backed managed folders/manifests validate on open and damaged derived state can be reconstructed without treating internal metadata as user source.
GitHub-backed Branches remain native Git branches while Twig/Leaf/Subroot history survives through protected Stack companion metadata without appearing as normal Branches.
Deleting the GitHub companion ref triggers deterministic recovery where retained objects permit it and otherwise reports exact unrecoverable state.
Dual Files+GitHub mode records authority/sync checkpoints and surfaces concurrent divergence as SyncConflict instead of last-writer-wins.
A mixed public/private project cannot publish a projection whose reachable tree/history includes private source or credentials.
Raw Git operations that would corrupt Stack lineage/managed refs are blocked or require explicit advanced reconciliation.
Project/domain permissions prevent a child from granting access beyond private ancestor/project policy.
Revision-pinned CI/check results gate protected promotions and stale check results cannot satisfy a newer revision.
A Release records immutable source revision/tag/artifacts/check state and package metadata remains linked to its source revision.
GitHub mirror/backup status exposes the last verified checkpoint and restore does not claim success when objects are unrecoverable.
Sites preview/production deployment and Open in Dev retain exact Stack ProjectID/DomainID/revision identity.
Stack Issues can link to Boards without duplicating Boards as a divergent project-management database.
Automations/webhooks receive typed stable-ID lifecycle events with observable delivery failure state.
Public forks use independent identity/provenance and cannot expose private Stack-managed storage.
Sweep previews/consolidates descendant work before removal; Prune is recoverable; Purge is separately privileged and blocked by active references.
Autocommit is opt-in, does not run over unresolved conflicts/ignored or prohibited content, and distinguishes local commit from remote sync success.
Large repositories/history use virtualised/lazy behaviour and missing LFS objects are reported instead of replaced silently.
Metadata migration is versioned/idempotent and migration failure preserves recoverable prior state.
Audit history covers source, permission, visibility, Root/Freeze/Subroot, review, release, prune/purge, mirror, autocommit and AI actions without logging secrets.
Keyboard/screen-reader workflows cover domain navigation, diffs, conflict resolution and review.
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical Stack model while capability-negotiating local materialisation/Git support.
When Home is absent at process start, Stack follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract.
Sites
Product role and ownership principle
9-1 Sites is the native CUI visual website-building, CMS, preview and deployment surface. It MUST support professional source-backed websites and web applications while remaining approachable for users who prefer visual authoring.
Sites owns visual page/component authoring, responsive layout, site design systems, CMS/content authoring, routes/navigation, preview/deployment orchestration, domains, site diagnostics and site-specific runtime configuration. Dev owns general-purpose code engineering, Stack owns source-control/collaboration history, Files owns canonical file/asset identity, Data owns structured data/database semantics and Forms owns form/assessment runtime semantics.
A SiteProject MUST remain user-owned and addressable as real structured project/source state. Sites MUST NOT make opaque generated output the only canonical representation or require an export-to-code step for ordinary Dev/Stack interoperability.
Primary donor: cakemods site plugin
The latest appropriate cakemods website/site-plugin source is the primary donor and implementation reference for Sites. Its visual Page Editor, reusable-section/component model, design-system integration, preview behaviour, editor-shell/public-route separation, authoring quality-of-life and proven website-management behaviours MUST be preserved, expanded or replaced by demonstrably equivalent 9to1-native implementations.
Implementation MUST inspect/fetch the current donor source at implementation time if it is not present in the canonical development environment, subject to licensing and the global donor rules. A simplified greenfield page builder is not an acceptable substitute merely because it is easier to implement.
Sites may replace WordPress/PHP-specific storage, admin or runtime coupling with 9to1-native project, CUI, API and provider infrastructure, but donor functionality and useful interaction semantics must survive unless explicitly documented as not applicable.
Donor parity audit
A donor-parity inventory MUST classify every meaningful cakemods site/editor capability as Preserved, Expanded, Replaced by 9to1-native equivalent, or Not applicable with a recorded reason.
Parity review includes visual page editing, reusable sections/components, design-system/token handling, editor/public-shell ownership, page preview, route-specific asset/style loading, responsive behaviour, component state, site/content management, recovery and mature editing QoL visible in the donor.
Missing donor source is not permission to invent a toy substitute; the autonomous implementation process must obtain the latest appropriate donor source where the global donor contract permits.
Canonical SiteProject model
SiteProject has stable SiteID/ProjectID, source binding, framework/project type, Pages[], Routes[], Components[], ReusableComponents[], Layouts[], Theme/DesignSystem, Assets[], ContentCollections[], NavigationModels[], LogicGraphIDs[], DataBindings[], FormBindings[], Environments[], Deployments[], Domains[], Redirects[], SEO configuration, Analytics/Consent configuration, ExtensionState, Settings and Revision.
Page, Route, Component, ContentCollection, ContentRecord, Asset reference, Deployment and Domain binding each use stable identifiers that do not depend on mutable display names, URL paths or visual order unless the entity is explicitly path-addressed by design.
Persisted Sites-native formats are versioned. Unknown incompatible schema versions are rejected/preserved/migrated explicitly; they are not silently reinterpreted.
New Site and framework/project creation
New Site provides searchable templates/project types such as Blank, marketing/business site, portfolio, blog, documentation, landing page, web application, community/project site, content-driven site and other installed provider templates.
Where applicable the user selects framework/runtime/provider rather than being forced into one proprietary framework. First-party/native Sites projects and supported source projects may include HTML/CSS/JavaScript and registered framework providers such as React/Next/Astro or later equivalents when those providers can preserve the required round-trip contract.
Existing source projects may be opened from Stack/Dev. Sites MUST detect whether the selected framework/provider supports full visual round-trip, partial visual representation or preview-only mode and state the capability clearly.
Visual Page Editor
The normal Sites authoring surface is heavily based on the cakemods Page Editor model: site/page tree or layers, central visual canvas/preview and contextual Inspector/properties, with source available through Dev.
Users can create, select, move, nest, duplicate, hide, delete and configure supported components directly on the canvas/tree. Selection state is synchronised across canvas, component tree, Inspector, node graph and Dev/source mapping where supported.
The editor manipulates canonical page/component state rather than a screenshot approximation. Published output, preview, Dulche actions and APIs consume the same semantic component/project model.
Component and section model
Sites uses a canonical structured component tree. Core component categories include section/container, header, footer, navigation, text/heading, image/media, button/link, card, list, table, form host, dialog, tabs/accordion, gallery, hero/splash, sidebar/rail, CMS collection renderer, embed, custom component and extension-contributed types.
Component has stable ComponentID, ComponentType, properties, child/slot structure, layout, design-token/style references, responsive overrides, bindings, interaction references, component state, accessibility properties, source mapping where applicable and Revision.
The donor's reusable-section/component concept is preserved and expanded. User/org component libraries may provide reusable headers, footers, heroes, pricing blocks, FAQs, CTAs and domain-specific components.
Reusable components and sections
A reusable component/section definition has stable definition identity and may be instantiated across pages. Instances can expose declared properties/slots while inheriting the definition's structure/style/logic.
Sites distinguishes linked instances from detached copies. Editing a linked definition updates its instances according to override rules; Detach creates an independent component tree and must be an explicit operation.
Overrides are structured and traceable. Sites MUST NOT duplicate an entire reusable definition into each instance merely to support one overridden property.
Editor-shell and public-route context ownership
Sites MUST preserve the donor architecture's strict separation between editor/admin chrome and the public site being edited. Public headers, footers, theme chrome and public-only CSS MUST NOT leak into the Sites editor shell unless rendered inside the isolated public preview.
Rendering contexts include at least editor shell, public/live route, page preview, component preview and CMS/dynamic preview. Each context resolves an explicit asset/style/component ownership manifest.
Context boundaries are testable. A component or style registered only for a public route MUST NOT accidentally become part of the editor shell merely because the preview is open.
Layout and page composition
The visual editor supports mature responsive web layout including normal document flow, stack/flex-style layout, grid, wrapping, alignment, gaps, padding/margins, min/max sizing, aspect ratio, container widths, sticky/fixed positioning where supported, overlays and deliberate absolute/freeform positioning.
Structured responsive layout is the default. Sites MUST NOT represent ordinary pages as arbitrary fixed coordinates that only happen to fit one viewport.
Page/component hierarchy and layout rules remain editable through the Inspector and typed Sites actions; visual drag/reorder is a convenience over the same model.
Responsive design and breakpoints
Sites provides desktop, tablet, phone and custom responsive previews plus drag-resizable viewport inspection. Breakpoints come from the active project/design system and may be provider-defined.
Responsive properties inherit through a predictable cascade. A breakpoint override records only the changed properties rather than cloning the entire page.
The Inspector shows whether a value is inherited, defined at the current breakpoint or overridden elsewhere and allows resetting an override to inherited state.
Design system and tokens
Site-wide design state includes semantic colour tokens, typography, spacing scale, radius, shadows, breakpoints, container widths, component variants, interaction states and theme modes.
Components SHOULD reference semantic design tokens rather than duplicating unrelated literal styling where the project/provider supports tokens. Changing a shared token updates consumers without rewriting page structure.
Sites preserves the cakemods donor's design-system ownership concepts while migrating them into shared 9to1 theme/component APIs where appropriate.
Themes and component variants
Sites supports site theme variants including light/dark/system modes where configured. Theme changes MUST NOT destroy page content or component structure.
Components may define named variants and states such as primary/secondary button, compact/feature card, Default/Hover/Focused/Disabled/Loading/Error/Selected.
Visual preview can force a component state for design inspection without mutating production runtime state.
Visual source round-trip and code-defined constructs
Sites and Dev operate on the same canonical project/source wherever the active framework/provider supports round-tripping. A visual property change updates the real source/project representation; a supported source edit is reflected back into Sites after parse/reconcile.
Source mapping relates runtime/visual components to component definitions, project resources and source ranges/symbols where available.
If a valid project construct cannot be represented visually, Sites MUST preserve it and mark it Code-defined, Partially visual or another explicit capability state. It MUST NOT delete, flatten or rewrite unsupported code simply to make the canvas editable.
Generated code/assets derived from canonical node graphs or Sites metadata are marked as generated with provenance. Users are not encouraged to hand-edit generated output unless the provider declares supported reverse mapping.
Pages, routes and navigation
Page and Route are distinct canonical concepts. A Page may render at one or more routes according to provider/project rules; Routes support static, nested and parameterised/dynamic paths, redirects and error/not-found routes.
Changing a route checks internal references and can offer redirects. Navigation items SHOULD reference PageID/RouteID for internal destinations rather than storing only fragile path strings.
Navigation models support reusable menus, nested entries, active-state semantics, external links and conditional visibility where permitted.
Preview fidelity and asset manifest
Sites preview MUST use the same applicable component styles, theme assets, route-specific assets, fonts and rendering rules as the corresponding public/live route wherever technically possible. The cakemods donor's route/context asset-manifest discipline is a mandatory architectural reference.
Preview MUST NOT be a separately styled mock that can pass while the published page renders differently. Differences caused by deployment-only services are declared explicitly.
Route-specific assets such as homepage-only CSS/scripts are loaded only in applicable preview/live contexts and MUST NOT leak into unrelated pages or editor chrome.
Live preview and last-valid render
Preview modes include in-editor canvas, interactive preview, full-screen preview and shareable preview deployment where supported.
Where the framework/provider supports it, source/visual edits trigger incremental build/hot reload. Preview state visibly reports Live, Building, Reloading, Build failed, Disconnected or Paused.
If a new change fails to build/render, Sites preserves the last valid preview and overlays/links the current diagnostics rather than replacing the canvas with an uninformative blank page.
Stack source-control integration
A SiteProject may bind directly to Stack ProjectID/DomainID/revision. Editing context clearly identifies Main, Branch, Twig or Leaf and the exact source revision used for preview/deployment.
Sites edits become ordinary reviewable source changes in the selected Stack domain. Sites MUST NOT create an anonymous divergent copy when a source-backed Stack project is active.
Branch/Twig/Leaf preview deployments bind to exact revisions. Production deployment defaults to an approved Main/release revision unless project policy explicitly authorises another source.
Dev integration
Open in Dev opens the same project/domain/source identity, optionally preserving selected page/component/source mapping. Open in Sites from Dev opens the visual authoring surface for the same compatible resource.
Dev Code | Preview may use Sites as the preview provider. Source edits, build diagnostics and visual preview remain revision-linked rather than being transferred through export/import.
Advanced code-defined components, server functions, framework configuration and tests remain fully available in Dev even when the visual Sites surface presents simplified controls.
Full shared Node Graph Framework
Sites exposes the full shared 9to1 Node Graph Framework for advanced interaction and application behaviour. The node editor is a first-class companion to the cakemods-derived visual Page Editor rather than a separate incompatible automation product.
Visual Editor primarily answers structure/content/layout/style; Node Editor primarily owns events, runtime state, dynamic data, navigation/action flows, integrations and advanced animation/interaction.
Graph objects use stable GraphID/NodeID/PortID identity, typed connections, validation, grouping/comments, copy/paste, undo/redo, Draft/Published revision semantics and Dulche mutation through 9to1.NodeGraph.*.
Simple interaction UI and graph parity
Ordinary interactions remain approachable without opening nodes. Examples include Button → Navigate to page, open dialog, submit Form, set link or trigger a simple animation through Inspector controls.
Simple interaction configuration MUST map to the same canonical behaviour/graph primitives used by the advanced Node Editor, or to a formally shared behaviour object represented consistently in both views.
Open in Node Editor reveals/extends the advanced representation without silently changing the simple configured behaviour.
Sites node events, conditions and actions
Representative Sites events include PageLoaded/Unloaded, RouteChanged, ComponentClicked, Hovered, Focused, ValueChanged, Submitted, ScrollChanged, EnteredViewport, UserSignedIn/Out, CMSRecordChanged, timer/custom component events and provider/extension events.
Representative actions include Navigate/Redirect, UpdateComponentProperty/State, Show/Hide, Enable/Disable, Open/CloseDialog, ScrollTo, SetVariable, PlayAnimation, query/mutate permitted CMS/Data state, invoke Forms/Automation actions, call permitted API/server functions and emit custom events.
Conditions include typed comparisons, boolean combinations, role/auth state, viewport/capability state, collection/query results, component state and validation outcomes.
Node execution contexts and trust boundaries
Every executable node declares execution context/capabilities such as client-safe, server/trusted backend, build-time, deployment-provider or external integration. Sites MUST NOT compile secrets or trusted permission checks into untrusted browser execution merely because a graph contains them.
Security-sensitive permission, private Data mutation and credential operations are executed/verified in trusted environments through owning APIs. Client-side visibility logic is not an access-control boundary.
The graph editor visually identifies execution-boundary transitions and validates impossible/unsafe client↔server data flows before publish where determinable.
Node debugger and runtime inspection
Interactive preview includes node debugging: executed node/path highlighting, breakpoint/pause where supported, values, state variables, execution timing, errors and linked network/provider failures.
A user can exercise a page interaction and inspect the actual path taken through the graph rather than treating the node canvas as a static diagram.
Runtime inspection uses development/test context and respects secret redaction/permission boundaries.
Component state and node-driven animation
Components can expose named runtime states and node transitions, for example ProductCard Default → Loading → Selected/Error.
Simple animations remain configurable visually; advanced sequences may use graph/timeline primitives such as EnteredViewport → easing/spring → opacity/transform/property changes.
Responsive layout is normally expressed through design/layout breakpoints rather than width-check node spaghetti. Runtime viewport/capability nodes are reserved for behaviour that is genuinely conditional rather than ordinary responsive styling.
Native CMS and content collections
Sites includes a native structured CMS. ContentCollection has stable CollectionID, schema fields/types, indexes/constraints where supported, relationships, permissions, publishing workflow and Revision. ContentRecord has stable RecordID independent of display title/slug.
Typical collections include BlogPost, Product, Event, TeamMember, DocumentationPage or user-defined schemas. Supported fields include text/rich content, slug, number, boolean, date/time, media/File reference, enum, reference, list/set and structured/nested data where the provider supports it.
CMS authoring provides list/table and record-editing interfaces appropriate to the schema rather than forcing content authors into page source.
CMS relationships and dynamic content
Collections support references and one-to-one, one-to-many and many-to-many relations where the selected backend permits them. Relationship identity uses stable collection/record IDs rather than matching display strings.
Dynamic components can bind to record fields or collection queries. Collection renderers support filtering, sorting, pagination/loading and empty/loading/error states.
Complex structured data/database requirements may delegate to Data; Sites CMS remains optimised for web content authoring rather than duplicating Data's complete database product.
Dynamic routes and page templates
Dynamic routes such as /blog/:slug can bind to a collection/query and a reusable page template. Route resolution detects duplicate/conflicting slugs and unavailable records.
Dynamic page preview can select representative records and preserves the template/record distinction; editing template layout does not silently mutate record content.
Generated sitemap/canonical metadata use resolved published routes/records rather than draft-only paths.
Rich content authoring
CMS/page rich content supports headings, paragraphs, lists, links, images/media, tables, quotes, code blocks and registered rich components where supported. Long-form content MUST NOT require hand-authoring raw HTML for ordinary use.
Rich content remains structured and sanitised according to project/runtime security policy; pasted content does not gain arbitrary executable privilege.
Data integration
Sites can bind components, collections or server-side flows to Data projects/tables/queries through typed Data APIs. Examples include product grids, member dashboards, reporting widgets or structured content sources.
Bindings reference stable Data IDs/fields and preserve typed values, permissions and Data's live-database protection semantics. Sites MUST NOT bypass Data safeguards by issuing hidden raw mutations directly to backing databases.
Data-backed collection/rendering state includes loading, empty, error and stale/unavailable handling.
Forms integration
Sites embeds 9to1 Forms natively by referencing FormID/FormVersionID or another supported Forms embed/runtime reference. Contact forms, registrations, applications, quizzes and custom Forms modes remain owned by Forms.
Site styling may provide theme/context integration without discarding Forms validation, accessibility, response versioning, anti-abuse, assessment or Data-binding semantics.
Forms events exposed to Sites node graphs are typed and permission-scoped.
Files and asset management
Sites uses Files as canonical asset/file identity where appropriate. Asset references include stable File/Asset IDs, origin/provenance, usage references, alt/caption metadata, transformations/derived variants and Revision.
The asset browser supports images, video, icons, documents, fonts where licensing permits and other registered media. Moving/renaming a Files-backed asset MUST NOT break references that use stable identity.
Deleting an asset checks/reports site usages and follows Files recovery semantics rather than silently replacing broken content.
Image/media optimisation
Sites supports crop/focal point, responsive image variants, appropriate format optimisation, lazy/loading policy and alt text. The canonical source/original remains preserved.
Generated responsive thumbnails/encodings are derived build/cache assets with provenance; Sites MUST NOT create untracked duplicate originals merely to satisfy one page size.
Video/media embeds distinguish first-party/file media from external providers and expose privacy/performance implications.
SEO and discoverability
Per-page/route SEO supports title, meta description, canonical URL, robots/index policy, Open Graph/social metadata, structured data/schema and sitemap inclusion. Site-level configuration covers canonical hostname, sitemap, robots.txt and defaults.
Sites provides structured diagnostics for missing/duplicate titles, missing descriptions where policy expects them, broken canonical references, inaccessible/missing image alternatives and other deterministic SEO problems it can verify.
AI may propose SEO content but must not invent factual business claims or silently publish changes.
Accessibility diagnostics and guardrails
Sites continuously checks representative accessibility requirements including contrast, missing image alternatives, semantic labels, heading order, focus/keyboard accessibility, colour-only state, touch target sizing, animation/reduced-motion behaviour and custom component accessibility where inspectable.
Accessibility issues appear as structured diagnostics tied to PageID/ComponentID/source location where possible and integrate with Dev Problems/Dulche context.
Visual design freedom MUST NOT silently disable required semantic labels, focus order or other minimum accessibility behaviour.
Performance and web-quality diagnostics
Sites surfaces web-performance problems it can determine such as oversized images/media, excessive bundles/scripts/fonts, known render-blocking resources, large page payloads and expensive third-party dependencies.
Preview/build may expose measurable runtime metrics where the provider/runtime supports reliable collection. Unknown metrics remain unknown rather than fabricated.
Optimisation actions preserve behaviour/source ownership and remain inspectable changes.
Domains, redirects and HTTPS
Sites manages custom-domain bindings through a typed DomainBinding model with stable DomainBindingID, environment, hostname, canonical/apex/www policy, verification state, DNS requirements, TLS/HTTPS state and Revision.
Users can attach/remove domains, choose canonical host, configure redirects and inspect ownership/DNS/TLS status. Provider integrations may automate required DNS records only within the authorised scope and MUST NOT alter unrelated records.
Route/domain changes identify broken links/redirect opportunities and do not claim a domain is live until provider verification succeeds.
Deployment environments
Sites supports explicit Development/Preview and Production environments, plus Staging or provider-defined environments where configured.
Deployment has stable DeploymentID, SiteID/ProjectID, Stack DomainID/revision where applicable, environment, build/config revision, provider, URL, build result, deployment result, timestamps, actor/initiator and status.
A deployment is pinned to source/config revisions. A preview URL MUST identify a concrete deployment/revision rather than silently floating to whatever source is latest.
Deployment providers and build pipeline
Deployment uses a provider abstraction. First-party/connected providers may offer static hosting, edge/server functions, object storage/CDN, DNS/domain integration and preview deployments according to capabilities. Extensions can register additional providers.
Build pipeline exposes dependency restore, build/generate, validation, packaging and deploy/verify stages where applicable. Failures produce typed diagnostics and stage status rather than a generic Deployment failed result.
Sites does not hard-code one provider's CLI/configuration as the canonical project model; provider-specific settings may be retained as explicit provider configuration.
Deployment history, rollback and publishing safeguards
Sites preserves deployment history with source revision, configuration, build/check result, provider/environment, actor and URL/status.
Rollback normally redeploys a previously successful known source/config revision; it MUST NOT erase newer source history merely to return production to an earlier deployment.
Production publish is an external consequential action. The UI/API shows environment, domain, source DomainID/revision, build/check state and meaningful warnings before execution according to the global permission model. AI MUST NOT silently publish to production without an explicit authorised action/automation.
Custom code, scripts and server functions
Advanced projects support controlled custom CSS, JavaScript/TypeScript/modules, head/body markup hooks, custom components and server/API functions according to framework/provider capabilities.
Custom code is source-backed, versioned and visible in Dev/Stack; Sites MUST NOT store consequential executable snippets only in an invisible proprietary database.
Server functions/endpoints are real project resources with Dev debugging/testing where supported. Sites may provide simplified configuration but does not invent an incompatible second backend language/runtime.
Environment variables and secrets
Sites distinguishes public build/runtime values from private server/provider secrets. Secret values use shared secure credential infrastructure where possible and are referenced by ID/name rather than committed into project source.
Secrets MUST NOT be exposed into browser bundles, logs, previews, AI context or generated diffs unless the operation explicitly requires the value and the caller/environment is authorised.
Build/deploy diagnostics redact secret values while preserving enough context to identify which configured secret/reference failed.
Authentication and member areas
Sites may integrate with 9to1 identity/auth providers to create login/account/member experiences and restricted routes/components. Identity objects and permissions remain owned by the shared identity/security layer.
Restricted page visibility alone is not a security boundary; backend/private data access requires server-side authorisation.
Member/user-specific page state is represented explicitly so preview/test can simulate authorised roles without embedding real private credentials.
Localisation and site search
Sites supports locale-aware content/routes, language selector, fallback language and alternate-language SEO metadata where enabled. Translations remain editable content with provenance even when AI-assisted.
Site search can index selected published pages, CMS collections and permitted Data-backed content. Search provider/index state is typed and exposes stale/rebuild/error state for dynamic content.
Analytics, scripts and consent
Sites supports registered analytics/providers and custom events without silently injecting tracking. Analytics configuration identifies provider, enabled environments, events/scopes and privacy/consent requirements.
Consent configuration can categorise integrations/scripts such as Essential, Preferences, Analytics and Advertising and delay applicable execution until consent where configured/required.
Templates MUST NOT silently enable third-party tracking merely because the donor/template contained a tracking snippet.
Collaboration and revisions
Concurrent authoring uses stable page/component/content revisions and conflict detection. Sites MUST NOT silently overwrite another editor's changes.
Comments/review may attach to PageID/ComponentID/content where supported; source-level review remains available through Stack/Dev.
Visual and source edits participate in the same canonical revision/history model so conflicts can identify semantic component/property changes where possible.
Dulche AI authoring and visual QA
Dulche semantic context includes SiteID/ProjectID, current Stack DomainID/revision, selected PageID/ComponentID, route, component hierarchy, layout/responsive breakpoint, design tokens, CMS schema/record, bindings, node graph selection, diagnostics, preview/build/deployment state and Revision.
AI may create/refactor pages, components, responsive layouts, themes, CMS schemas/content, bindings, node graphs, SEO metadata and project structure only through typed Sites/shared-domain actions.
AI-created sites are ordinary editable SiteProjects, not screenshots or opaque generated bundles.
UI-oriented AI changes SHOULD use available visual preview/QA in addition to build success. Overflow, clipped content, broken responsive layout, inaccessible contrast and visibly failed states must not be declared correct solely because compilation passed.
Shared extension system
Sites participates in the shared 9to1 extension platform. Extensions may contribute components, component inspectors, CMS field types, Data sources/bindings, deployment providers, analytics/SEO integrations, project templates, visual-builder panels, node types and preview/runtime providers.
Extension contributions declare target Sites API version, permissions/capabilities and compatible platforms. A crashing extension must be containable/disableable according to the shared extension-host contract.
Sites extension development can be created/debugged from Dev's 9to1 Extension project type and appropriate Sites Extension Host.
First-party Sites URL namespace
Every publishable SiteProject receives or may reserve a first-party Sites URL under https://sites.9to1.uk/<site-slug>. The first-party URL is path-based rather than per-site DNS subdomain. Site identity remains stable even if the slug changes.
The site slug and Sites-managed route segments use the restricted lowercase character set a-z and hyphen; slash is the path-segment separator. Digits, spaces, underscores, mixed case, Unicode lookalikes and other punctuation are not valid in the first-party Sites namespace. A segment MUST NOT begin or end with a hyphen, and empty/repeated path segments are rejected. Sites normalises valid input to one canonical URL representation rather than allowing visually ambiguous aliases.
For example, a project may publish at sites.9to1.uk/cake and expose routes such as sites.9to1.uk/cake/about or sites.9to1.uk/cake/contact-us. Reserved platform/system names cannot be claimed as ordinary site slugs.
Slug availability is checked atomically at reservation/publish time. Changing a published slug is explicit and can create a managed redirect from the previous first-party URL according to retention/conflict policy.
AI name and domain verification
Every requested first-party site slug and every custom domain binding MUST pass automated name-safety verification before it can become an active public identity. Verification combines deterministic checks with an AI-assisted misleading-name assessment.
The assessment looks for likely impersonation, deceptive affiliation claims, confusingly similar names, misleading government/financial/security/support identities, obvious brand/person spoofing, homograph/punycode concerns for custom domains and other patterns that could materially mislead visitors about who operates the site. The AI assessment is a safety signal, not proof of wrongdoing.
Clear safe names may pass automatically. Ambiguous/high-risk names enter a PendingReview state rather than being silently published or permanently rejected by an opaque model decision. The user can see a meaningful reason category and use the supported review/appeal path where applicable.
Owning or controlling a custom domain does not bypass misleading-name screening, and passing misleading-name screening does not prove domain ownership. Name-safety verification and technical ownership verification are separate mandatory gates.
Verification records use stable VerificationID, subject URL/domain, normalized representation, rules/model version, decision state, reason categories, timestamps and review/audit references. Sensitive model internals need not be exposed, but the user-visible result must be actionable and non-deceptive.
Custom domains and provider connections
Sites supports custom apex domains and subdomains in addition to the default sites.9to1.uk/<site-slug> address. The user chooses which verified address is canonical and can configure redirects from other bound addresses.
Manual custom-domain ownership verification MUST use a secure provider-independent challenge, normally a purpose-specific DNS TXT record or equivalent proof whose random token is bound to the SiteID/account and expires/rotates according to policy. Merely entering a hostname, receiving traffic for it or controlling a Sites project is not sufficient proof of ownership.
Domain takeover protections include checking existing active claims, challenge freshness, account/site binding, DNS result validation, canonicalized IDN/punycode representation and safe reassignment/release semantics. A domain already actively bound elsewhere cannot be silently stolen by a second project.
Sites MAY connect to supported DNS/domain providers such as Cloudflare and later providers through typed provider integrations. With explicitly scoped authorization, a connected provider may enumerate eligible zones, create/verify only the required challenge/serving records, inspect DNS/TLS readiness and maintain authorised redirects/routing.
Provider authorization MUST be least-privilege where the provider permits it. Connecting a provider for one site/domain does not grant Sites permission to rewrite unrelated zones or records. All DNS mutations show affected zone/record scope through the global permission model and remain auditable.
If automated provider configuration is unavailable, Sites presents exact manual DNS instructions and continuously exposes Pending, Verified, Misconfigured, Conflict or provider-specific failure state without pretending propagation has completed.
Canonical Sites directory in Files
Every SiteProject has an explicit user-addressable project directory under the user's Sites area in Files, conceptually Sites/<Project Name>/, or an equivalent stable Files location selected/managed by the user.
That directory contains the actual source-backed site resources appropriate to the project's framework: source, public/static assets, component/page resources, framework manifests/configuration and versioned Sites project metadata where applicable. Sites-internal derived caches or provider credentials MUST NOT be mixed into user source as if they were canonical project content.
Files identity is canonical for Files-backed resources. Moving or renaming the project directory through supported Files/Sites operations preserves SiteID/project binding through stable IDs rather than creating a new site accidentally.
The site MUST remain reconstructable and editable from the canonical Sites/Files/Stack project resources. An external host MUST NOT be the only surviving copy of the source project.
External hosting and deployment authority
The public website is stored/served through an external HostingProvider or configured first-party hosting service backed by an external provider. The deployed copy is derived runtime/deployment state, not an independently editable canonical authority.
The authority chain is: canonical editable Sites project and Files/Stack source → revision-pinned build artifact → external provider deployment → first-party/custom domain routing. Each Deployment records SiteID, source DomainID/revision where applicable, build/config revision, provider identity and deployment artifact/result identity.
Provider-hosted state may include generated static output, server bundles/functions, optimized media, CDN/cache objects and runtime configuration. These artifacts retain deployment provenance but do not replace canonical source.
Direct provider-side edits that cannot be mapped back to canonical source are treated as external drift. Sites MUST NOT silently adopt them as canonical. Where import/reconciliation is supported it is an explicit reviewed operation.
If a hosting provider is unavailable, loses deployment state or the user changes provider, Sites can rebuild from canonical Files/Stack source, deploy to another configured provider, remap first-party/custom-domain routing and verify the resulting deployment. Recovery MUST NOT depend on scraping the live public website to reconstruct the project.
Hosting, URL and domain API additions
The Sites API MUST include typed operations equivalent to:
9to1.Sites.ReserveSlug(siteID, slug);
9to1.Sites.ChangeSlug(siteID, slug, options?);
9to1.Sites.VerifyPublicName(target, options?);
9to1.Sites.GetPublicNameVerification(verificationID);
9to1.Sites.BeginDomainVerification(siteID, domain, options?);
9to1.Sites.VerifyDomain(domainBindingID, options?);
9to1.Sites.ConnectDomainProvider(provider, scopes, options?);
9to1.Sites.ConfigureDomainRecords(domainBindingID, options?);
9to1.Sites.GetHostingState(siteID, environmentID?);
9to1.Sites.ChangeHostingProvider(siteID, providerID, options?);
Provider-specific DNS/hosting mutations still use the shared credential/permission model and MUST NOT bypass Sites deployment/domain safeguards.
Sites API
Sites' first-party API catalogue is exhaustive under the global API-parity rule. Minimum canonical entry points include:
9to1.Sites.CreateProject(config);
9to1.Sites.OpenProject(siteOrProjectID);
9to1.Sites.CreatePage(siteID, config);
9to1.Sites.UpdatePage(pageID, patch);
9to1.Sites.CreateRoute(siteID, config);
9to1.Sites.UpdateRoute(routeID, patch);
9to1.Sites.AddComponent(parentID, componentType, config);
9to1.Sites.UpdateComponent(componentID, patch);
9to1.Sites.MoveComponent(componentID, destination, options?);
9to1.Sites.CreateReusableComponent(siteID, sourceComponentID, config?);
9to1.Sites.DetachComponentInstance(instanceID);
9to1.Sites.SetLayout(targetID, layout);
9to1.Sites.SetResponsiveOverride(targetID, breakpointID, patch);
9to1.Sites.UpdateDesignSystem(siteID, patch);
9to1.Sites.CreateCollection(siteID, schema);
9to1.Sites.UpdateCollectionSchema(collectionID, change, options?);
9to1.Sites.CreateContent(collectionID, record);
9to1.Sites.UpdateContent(recordID, patch);
9to1.Sites.BindData(targetID, dataBinding);
9to1.Sites.BindForm(targetID, formBinding);
9to1.Sites.SetSEO(targetID, config);
9to1.Sites.CreatePreview(siteID, sourceRevision, config?);
9to1.Sites.Build(siteID, sourceRevision, config?);
9to1.Sites.Deploy(siteID, sourceRevision, environmentID, options?);
9to1.Sites.RollbackDeployment(deploymentID, options?);
9to1.Sites.AttachDomain(siteID, domainConfig);
9to1.Sites.ConfigureRedirect(siteID, redirectConfig);
9to1.Sites.GetDiagnostics(scope, options?);
Advanced node-graph mutation uses 9to1.NodeGraph.*; source control, Files, Data, Forms, Dev, identity, credentials and Automations use their owning namespaces where canonical.
Automation and typed events
Sites emits typed events such as PageCreated/Changed, ComponentChanged, RouteChanged, ContentPublished/Changed, BuildStarted/Completed/Failed, PreviewCreated, DeploymentStarted/Completed/Failed, DomainVerified/Failed, DiagnosticChanged and provider/extension lifecycle events.
Automations/agents consume stable IDs and permission-scoped data. External deployment/domain/content publication side effects remain subject to the global Home permission broker and product-specific protections.
Security and abuse boundaries
Sites sanitises/validates untrusted rich content, embed/custom code boundaries and public form/data interactions according to the active runtime/provider security model.
Public site content MUST NOT gain access to Sites editor/admin privileges merely because it is rendered in preview. Preview documents/iframes/processes use isolation appropriate to the platform.
Public/private source, CMS records, Data bindings and credentials preserve their owning permission boundaries through build and deployment.
Performance and large-site behaviour
Sites virtualises large page/component trees, CMS record lists, assets and deployment history. It loads/compiles only the content/assets needed for the active authoring/preview workflow where possible.
Large CMS collections, asset libraries and Data-backed lists use paging/streaming rather than unbounded UI payloads. Preview/build work is cancellable where technically possible.
Visual editing MUST remain responsive while builds/deployments/background indexing occur; long work exposes JobID/progress/status rather than blocking the editor.
Recovery and failure behaviour
Draft visual/source edits are crash-recoverable where feasible and do not corrupt the last valid published/deployed source revision.
A failed build/deploy leaves the prior successful deployment intact unless the provider itself performed an irreversible partial side effect; Sites reports each completed/failed stage accurately.
Structured failures include SiteNotFound, PageNotFound, ComponentNotFound, UnsupportedVisualConstruct, SourceRoundTripConflict, RouteConflict, CMSValidationFailed, BindingUnavailable, NodeGraphInvalid, PreviewBuildFailed, BuildFailed, DeploymentFailed, ProviderUnavailable, DomainVerificationFailed, DNSConflict, SecretUnavailable, PrivateDataExposureBlocked, RevisionConflict, PermissionDenied and CapabilityUnavailable plus provider-specific errors.
Platform capability behaviour
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical SiteProject/Page/Component/CMS/NodeGraph/Deployment models while capability-negotiating local framework tooling, embedded preview, browser isolation, filesystem/source access and provider integrations.
A platform that cannot provide local build/runtime functionality uses an explicitly configured remote/provider capability or reports CapabilityUnavailable; it MUST NOT silently fake preview/build/deployment completion.
When Home is absent at process start, Sites follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract.
Acceptance requirements
Sites is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
The latest appropriate cakemods site-plugin donor has been audited and each meaningful editor/site capability is preserved, expanded, replaced equivalently or explicitly marked not applicable.
A source-backed site opens in the cakemods-derived visual editor with stable Page/Component identity and can be edited without an export-to-code step.
Editor-shell/public-route isolation prevents public site header/footer/styles from leaking into Sites chrome while isolated preview still renders the selected public structures.
Preview loads the same applicable route/theme/component asset manifest as the live route for representative homepage and ordinary-page cases.
A supported visual property edited in Sites updates the canonical source/project and a supported Dev source edit round-trips back into Sites.
An unsupported valid code construct is preserved and shown as Code-defined/partial rather than silently deleted or flattened.
Responsive desktop/tablet/mobile overrides inherit correctly without cloning the entire page and can be reset to inherited state.
A linked reusable section updates its instances while Detach produces an independent instance without corrupting the original definition.
Simple Inspector interaction such as Button → Navigate behaves consistently with the advanced Node Editor representation.
A Sites node graph can implement a dynamic flow such as click → query/update state → show result, and the preview node debugger exposes the executed path/values.
A security-sensitive graph operation is kept in its trusted execution context and is not compiled into an untrusted client bundle with secrets.
CMS collections create typed records/relationships and drive a dynamic route such as /blog/:slug without unstable title-string identity.
Forms embed retains Forms validation/runtime semantics and Data binding uses Data APIs/permissions rather than hidden direct database mutation.
Files-backed asset rename/move preserves site references and derived responsive image variants retain source provenance.
SEO configuration generates correct representative title/canonical/sitemap behaviour and diagnostics identify representative missing/duplicate metadata.
Accessibility diagnostics identify representative contrast/alt/label/focus issues and the visual editor remains keyboard/screen-reader operable for core workflows.
A Stack Branch/Twig/Leaf opens in Sites with exact ProjectID/DomainID/revision; visual edits appear as ordinary changes in that same domain.
Open in Dev retains project/domain identity and Dev Code | Preview can use the Sites preview provider without export/import copying.
A preview deployment is pinned to an exact source revision and a production deployment records its exact source/config revision.
Rollback redeploys a known prior successful revision without destructively deleting newer source history.
Domain attach/verification reports exact DNS/TLS state and does not modify unrelated DNS records.
A build/deployment failure preserves the prior successful production deployment and reports stage/provider failure accurately.
Private secrets are not emitted into browser bundles, logs, AI context or diffs during representative build/deploy workflows.
AI-generated page/layout changes are normal editable source-backed objects and undergo available build plus visual QA rather than claiming success from compilation alone.
A Sites extension can register a representative component/node/provider contribution through the shared extension host with declared permissions.
Large page/component trees, CMS lists and asset libraries remain usable through virtualisation/paging and cancellable long-running jobs.
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same canonical Sites model while capability-negotiating local build/preview/provider features.
When Home is absent at process start, Sites follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract.
A published site receives a default first-party address under sites.9to1.uk/<site-slug>; first-party slug/route segments enforce the specified lowercase a-z/hyphen character rules with slash only as a path separator, reserved-name checks and atomic slug reservation.
A requested first-party slug and every custom domain binding pass deterministic plus AI-assisted misleading-name verification; ambiguous/high-risk cases become PendingReview with actionable reason/review state rather than opaque automatic publication.
Custom-domain ownership verification uses a site/account-bound secure DNS challenge and prevents duplicate/takeover claims; connected providers such as Cloudflare can configure only explicitly authorised records/zones under least-privilege scopes.
Every SiteProject has a user-addressable canonical project directory under the user's Sites area in Files containing the real source/project resources appropriate to its framework.
The external hosting provider stores/serves revision-pinned derived deployment artifacts and MUST NOT become the sole or independently editable canonical copy of the site.
A site can be rebuilt from canonical Files/Stack source, redeployed to a replacement hosting provider and remapped/verified without scraping the live website to reconstruct project state.
Terminal
Product role and core invariant
9-1 Terminal is the shared first-party terminal runtime and terminal application for 9to1. It provides genuine interactive shell/PTY behaviour plus a distinct natural-language AI execution mode, while preserving the exact security, permission and side-effect boundaries of the underlying action.
Terminal is not an AI chatbot styled as a command prompt. Command Mode remains a normal terminal capable of running existing shell applications unchanged; AI Mode is an additional semantic command/action surface.
Natural-language phrasing MUST NOT lower safety. An operation that is destructive, privileged, externally consequential, credential-sensitive or otherwise high-risk remains equally protected when requested in natural language.
Canonical session model
TerminalSession has stable TerminalSessionID, EnvironmentID, ShellProfileID, mode, process/PTY binding, working directory, title, tab/pane location, command history references, running process/job state, Stack/Dev context where applicable, creation/reconnect metadata and Revision.
Environment identity is explicit. A session always knows whether it targets the local host, WSL, container, SSH host, VM, Dev environment, 9to1-OS host or another registered execution provider.
Display names, tab order and current path are not used as durable session identity.
Persistent AI / Command mode switcher
Terminal provides an always-visible mode switcher comparable to Data's AI / SQL switcher. The two first-party states are AI and Command.
Command Mode sends ordinary terminal input to the selected shell/PTY with normal shell semantics, except for explicitly reserved Terminal meta-commands such as $Ask. It MUST NOT route ordinary recognised shell commands through an LLM merely because AI is available.
AI Mode interprets user input as natural-language intent, resolves the appropriate typed 9to1/system action or shell operation, presents verification when required and then executes through the owning supported APIs/runtime.
Switching modes does not create a new terminal session or lose working directory/environment context. The current mode is visibly obvious and included in accessibility state.
Command Mode
Command Mode behaves as a conventional professional terminal. Input supports the active shell's quoting, variables, pipes, redirection, chaining, job control, scripts, aliases/functions and interactive programs without Terminal rewriting command semantics.
Examples such as git status, dotnet build, python, ssh, vim or a project's CLI run directly through the selected environment rather than requiring AI interpretation.
Terminal may enrich recognised output with clickable links or structured metadata, but the original output stream remains faithful and recoverable.
$Ask non-executing AI assistance
Command Mode reserves the Terminal meta-command $Ask for conversational AI assistance that has no authority to execute a shell command or mutate the environment.
Examples include $Ask "why didn't this command work?", $Ask "what does this error mean?" and $Ask "what command lists processes on this shell?".
$Ask may receive permission-scoped context such as the immediately preceding command, exit status, selected/recent relevant output, shell/profile, environment type, working directory and registered project context. It MUST NOT indiscriminately send the whole terminal history or detected secrets.
$Ask returns explanation, troubleshooting steps and/or suggested command text. Suggested commands are not executed. The user may copy or insert a suggestion into Command Mode, after which it is treated as ordinary user-entered command input.
$Ask itself MUST NOT invoke a hidden command, app mutation, package install, process kill or external side effect. An explicit transition to AI Mode or separate Run/Insert action is required for execution.
AI Mode natural-language execution
AI Mode accepts natural-language requests such as "turn off my PC in 10 minutes", "find every PNG over 10 MB", "install the missing .NET SDK", "open the Data project for this CSV" or "show me what changed in this Stack Twig".
The resolver prefers the owning typed 9to1/system API when one exists. Shell command synthesis is used when a shell command is genuinely the appropriate supported operation, not as a shortcut around a semantic API.
Before execution Terminal produces an inspectable resolved action/plan containing target environment/app, operation, affected objects where knowable, risk level, whether it is reversible, scheduled/external effects and any shell commands that will actually run.
AI execution verification and dangerous-command protection
AI Mode may execute low-risk, clearly resolved actions according to the user's existing trust/permission policy. Potentially dangerous or ambiguous operations require explicit verification before execution.
Verification is mandatory for destructive/bulk-destructive filesystem operations, shutdown/restart, privilege/security changes, process termination with material impact, package/system changes, credential access, permission changes, remote/external mutations and other actions classified as elevated by the owning app/system action.
The verification view states what will run, where it will run, what is expected to change, affected object counts/scopes where determinable and what cannot be predicted. Unknown impact is displayed as unknown rather than omitted.
Ambiguous natural-language requests that could resolve to materially different consequential actions MUST pause for clarification/selection rather than choosing the more destructive interpretation.
AI Mode cannot split one dangerous request into many nominally lower-risk commands to evade Home risk aggregation or approval.
Home permission-broker integration
Protected AI Mode actions use the global Home permission broker. Terminal supplies stable caller/action identity, target app/environment, resolved scopes and risk metadata; it does not implement a weaker private approval system.
Manual Command Mode execution remains ordinary shell execution subject to OS/shell permissions and Terminal-specific guards. Where a shell command crosses a 9to1 protected semantic boundary such as Stack managed infrastructure, the owning product guard still applies.
Always Trust or other Home trust grants never bypass OS elevation, provider authentication, 2FA, Stack protections or product-specific safeguards.
Real PTY and shell behaviour
Supported local environments use a real pseudoterminal/conpty/PTY or platform-equivalent terminal backend. Terminal supports interactive stdin/stdout/stderr, ANSI/VT sequences, cursor control, terminal resize, signals, full-screen terminal applications and shell-native prompts/completion.
Closing, resizing or switching UI panes MUST NOT convert an interactive shell into one-shot process execution.
Where the platform cannot expose a local PTY, Terminal uses a declared remote/service terminal provider or reports CapabilityUnavailable; it MUST NOT simulate successful local shell execution.
Shell profiles and discovery
Terminal discovers installed shells and supports explicit ShellProfile objects. Representative profiles include PowerShell, Command Prompt where supported, Bash, Zsh, Fish, WSL distributions and extension/provider-contributed shells.
ShellProfile identifies executable/provider, arguments, environment setup, icon/name, default working-directory behaviour, shell-integration capability and environment compatibility.
Missing configured shells are shown as Missing/Unavailable with a clear reason and remediation path rather than failing with an unexplained spawn error.
Tabs, panes and window layouts
Terminal supports multiple tabs and horizontal/vertical split panes. Each pane hosts a TerminalSession or attachable terminal job and can be renamed, pinned, moved, duplicated or closed.
Workspace/session layout can be restored across restarts. Restoration recreates UI/session context according to policy but MUST NOT blindly rerun previously entered commands or consequential jobs.
Closing a pane with an active process prompts or follows configured safe behaviour indicating whether the process will be terminated, detached or left remote.
Working directory and path semantics
Each session maintains a real working directory appropriate to its environment. Working-directory changes initiated by the shell are tracked through shell integration where available rather than guessed solely from prompt text.
Paths remain native to the environment so existing CLIs work correctly. Files integration adds stable identity/navigation where possible without replacing required filesystem paths.
Drag/drop of a Files item into Command Mode inserts an appropriately escaped native path/reference for the active shell where supported.
Shell integration protocol
Optional first-party shell integration can report command start/end, command text, exit code, working directory, prompt boundaries and other safe semantic state. This allows reliable command/output grouping without fragile ANSI scraping.
Raw PTY operation remains functional when shell integration is unavailable. Terminal MUST NOT require modifying every third-party shell to provide basic terminal behaviour.
Shell integration data is environment-scoped and cannot be trusted as an authorisation signal for privileged operations.
Command and output history
Terminal maintains configurable history for commands and Terminal-native actions, distinguishing user-entered shell commands, AI-executed actions, AI-generated shell commands, $Ask requests, denied/cancelled actions and scheduled actions.
Users can search, filter, copy, rerun eligible commands, pin entries and clear history according to policy. Sensitive commands or outputs can be excluded/redacted.
History records whether an AI suggestion was merely shown, inserted, or actually executed; the UI MUST NOT imply execution from proposal alone.
Streaming output and semantic links
PTY output is rendered as real streaming ANSI/terminal content. Terminal may additionally recognise file:line references, directories, URLs, ports, process IDs, compiler diagnostics, Git/Stack identities and other registered entities.
Recognised entities become optional clickable actions such as Open in Dev, Show in Files or Open in Browse without altering the underlying captured output.
Third-party output remains displayable even when no semantic recogniser understands it.
Rich Terminal-native output
9to1-owned commands/actions and registered extensions MAY emit structured terminal blocks such as tables, progress, diagnostics, file results, images/previews or action cards where the terminal surface supports them.
Structured output always has an accessible text representation and MUST NOT make standard stdout/stderr consumers depend on a proprietary renderer.
Raw shell output and structured Terminal-native result objects remain distinguishable.
Long-running processes and jobs
Terminal supports servers, watchers, builds, log tails, REPLs and other indefinite/interactive processes. Users can send input, interrupt, terminate, detach/reconnect where the environment permits and inspect current process/session state.
Structured AI/system work may use TerminalJob with stable JobID, source request, resolved action, environment, process/provider identity, state, progress where real progress exists, timestamps, result/exit status and cancellation capability.
Terminal MUST NOT fabricate percentage progress for raw commands that do not expose meaningful progress.
Persistent scheduling
Natural-language requests such as "turn off my PC in 10 minutes" or "run this script tomorrow morning" create a persistent scheduled action through the appropriate Automation/OS scheduling capability rather than an in-memory Terminal timer.
The schedule records stable action/task identity, target EnvironmentID, requested action, execution time/rule, permission/trust context and cancellation/edit linkage.
Closing Terminal MUST NOT silently cancel a persistent scheduled action unless that behaviour was explicitly selected.
Consequential scheduled actions require the same verification/permission classification at creation and, where policy requires, revalidation at execution.
Elevation and privileged sessions
Privilege elevation is explicit. When an operation requires Administrator/root/elevated privileges, Terminal identifies the target operation and uses the platform-supported elevation mechanism.
A normal session MUST NOT silently become permanently elevated because one command required elevation. Deliberately created elevated sessions are visually and accessibly distinguished.
AI Mode cannot bypass elevation prompts or OS security boundaries.
Environment providers
Terminal supports environment providers for local host, WSL, containers, SSH/remotes, virtual machines, Dev environments, 9to1-OS systems and extension-contributed execution targets.
Environment has stable EnvironmentID, type, host/provider identity, connection/runtime state, platform/architecture, capabilities and security context.
Every action/command preview in AI Mode states the target environment so users cannot accidentally shut down, delete files from or install packages on the wrong machine.
SSH and remote terminals
SSH support includes host profiles, verified host-key workflow, secure key/credential references, reconnect and supported port-forwarding/tunnel capabilities.
Passwords/private keys are handled by shared secure credential infrastructure where possible and MUST NOT be copied into AI context/history/logs unnecessarily.
A host-key mismatch is a security error requiring explicit resolution; Terminal MUST NOT silently accept changed remote identity.
Container, WSL and VM terminals
Terminal can open or attach to shells inside supported containers/devcontainers, WSL distributions and virtual machines. Environment identity remains visible.
Dev's OS/VM run configurations may expose VM shell/serial/debug consoles through the shared Terminal engine. Reconnecting a VM console does not create a second conflicting VM unless the run provider explicitly requests one.
Provider lifecycle actions such as starting a stopped VM/container remain typed consequential operations rather than being hidden side effects of reading terminal history.
First-class Dev integration
Dev uses the same Terminal engine rather than maintaining a private emulator. Dev can create sessions bound to WorkspaceID/ProjectID, RunConfiguration, toolchain environment and working directory.
Compiler/build/test diagnostics recognised in Terminal link to Dev source and Problems using stable source locations when available.
Dev can host Terminal panes directly while Terminal can Open current directory/project in Dev without copying project state.
First-class Stack integration
When a session is bound to a Stack ProjectID/DomainID, Terminal shows the active source-domain context and can expose Stack-native commands/actions such as status, owned/inherited changes, promotion/check state and Open in Stack.
Raw Git commands remain available in Command Mode, but Stack-managed lineage, protected companion refs, Roots/Subroots/Freezes and other guards cannot be bypassed by invoking Git from Terminal. Unsafe operations are blocked or require Stack's explicit advanced reconciliation path.
AI Mode uses 9to1.Stack.* actions for semantic Stack requests rather than shelling out to Git when Stack is the canonical owner.
First-class Data integration
Terminal can address Data projects, queries and exports through typed Data actions and can open returned tables/results in Data. AI Mode requests such as "run this query against my selected Data project" use Data's target/protection model rather than bypassing it with an arbitrary database CLI.
Command Mode remains free to run installed database/SQL CLIs against user-configured connections, subject to their own credentials and permissions; Terminal clearly distinguishes those raw commands from 9to1 Data actions.
Structured Data results may render as accessible terminal tables and provide Open in Data.
First-class integration with all 9to1 apps
Every 9to1 app MAY register a Terminal integration provider exposing discoverable read/actions, context resolvers, entity links, completion/help metadata and structured renderers through the shared API model. Terminal treats this as a first-class platform capability, not bespoke one-off integrations.
AI Mode can route requests to canonical app APIs such as Files, Boards, Write, Present, Forms, Sites, Browse, Wave, Motion, Pictures, Spaces, Automations, AI Studio and future apps when the requested operation belongs to them.
Command Mode can expose explicit 9to1 command/meta-command tooling for users who want scriptable access, but those commands call the same app APIs and Home permissions rather than private UI automation.
Cross-app results support actions such as Open in <App>, reveal source object, continue in app or pipe/export structured data where the owning API permits.
9to1 command-line bridge
Terminal SHOULD provide a scriptable 9to1 CLI/command bridge for canonical app APIs, with discoverable namespaces/actions, machine-readable output option, stable exit codes and authentication/permission behaviour consistent with Home.
The CLI is not a second business-logic implementation. It dispatches to the owning 9to1 APIs.
Automation/scripting can therefore use explicit commands for Stack, Files, Data and other apps while AI Mode uses the same semantic operations from natural language.
Package and tool installation
AI Mode may resolve requests such as "install numpy" or "install the missing C++ compiler" only after resolving the intended project/environment/package manager/toolchain.
Project-native package managers and Dev Toolchain Manager remain authoritative. A Python project using a selected virtual environment MUST NOT silently install globally.
Package/system installation is a mutating/elevated action classified appropriately and shows target environment, package/tool and provider before execution when verification is required.
Error assistance and diagnostics
Terminal recognises failed commands through shell integration/exit codes where available. $Ask can explain the failure without executing fixes; AI Mode can separately propose and, after required verification, perform remediation.
Terminal can classify common issues such as executable missing, PATH/toolchain mismatch, permission/elevation required, dependency/package failure, working-directory problem, network/SSH failure or Stack guard rejection.
Where another app owns remediation, Terminal links/routs to that app rather than duplicating its configuration system.
Search, scrollback and large output
Terminal supports plain/case/regex search over retained session output and optionally across retained buffers/history according to privacy settings.
Scrollback is configurable and bounded. Huge streams use virtualised rendering and, where configured, disk-backed spooling/truncation rather than unbounded UI memory growth.
When earlier output is discarded due to limits, Terminal visibly records the truncation boundary rather than pretending the full stream is retained.
Clipboard and multiline paste safety
Terminal supports normal copy/paste, copy command, copy output and platform clipboard conventions. Multiline paste is detected and may require review/warning according to security settings and content risk.
Paste protection MUST NOT silently rewrite commands. It either executes the exact accepted paste or cancels/returns it to editable input.
AI-generated multiline scripts are visually distinguished from user-authored pasted scripts until the user accepts execution.
Secrets, privacy and AI-context filtering
Terminal assumes arbitrary third-party processes may print secrets. AI context construction uses scoped recent/selected data and applies configured secret-pattern redaction plus known credential references, but Terminal MUST NOT claim perfect secret detection.
Terminal content is not automatically sent to Dulche merely because a session exists. $Ask/AI Mode specify the context slice they require and honour app/workspace privacy policy.
Credentials, private keys, tokens and secure environment values are excluded from routine history/telemetry/AI prompts unless the operation explicitly and safely requires them.
Command risk metadata and audit
AI-resolved actions record canonical action IDs, target app/environment, risk classification, verification/permission outcome, executed command/API operation, result and affected identities where known.
Manual raw shell commands are not reclassified as if Terminal semantically understood every side effect, but privileged/guarded platform integrations may emit audit events where required.
Denied, cancelled, failed and partially completed AI actions remain auditable rather than disappearing from history.
Completion, aliases and snippets
Terminal supports shell-native completion and may augment it with registered command/app/entity providers. AI is not required for ordinary tab completion.
Users can manage reusable snippets/recipes and organisation-provided command templates. Snippets are inspectable text/structured actions, not opaque macros that bypass permission checks.
AI can draft a snippet from repeated work, but saving or running it remains an explicit user action.
Dulche context and behaviour
Dulche context for Terminal may include current TerminalSessionID, mode, EnvironmentID, shell profile, working directory, selected/recent command groups, exit code, current process, Dev workspace/Stack domain and registered app context subject to permissions.
In AI Mode Dulche performs semantic planning/execution through typed actions; in Command Mode $Ask is constrained to advice/explanation and cannot execute.
AI output MUST distinguish commands it suggests from operations it actually executed, and execution claims must be grounded in real process/API results.
Terminal API
Terminal's first-party API catalogue is exhaustive under the global API-parity rule. Minimum canonical entry points include:
9to1.Terminal.CreateSession(config);
9to1.Terminal.ListSessions(options?);
9to1.Terminal.GetSession(sessionID);
9to1.Terminal.CloseSession(sessionID, options?);
9to1.Terminal.SetMode(sessionID, mode);
9to1.Terminal.Execute(sessionID, command, options?);
9to1.Terminal.SendInput(sessionID, input);
9to1.Terminal.Interrupt(sessionID, options?);
9to1.Terminal.TerminateProcess(sessionID, processID, options?);
9to1.Terminal.Resize(sessionID, columns, rows);
9to1.Terminal.SetWorkingDirectory(sessionID, pathOrFileID);
9to1.Terminal.CreateSplit(sessionID, config);
9to1.Terminal.AttachEnvironment(sessionID, environmentID);
9to1.Terminal.OpenSSH(profileOrConfig);
9to1.Terminal.GetOutput(sessionID, rangeOrCursor, options?);
9to1.Terminal.SearchOutput(sessionID, query, options?);
9to1.Terminal.Ask(sessionID, question, context?);
9to1.Terminal.ResolveNaturalLanguage(sessionID, request, options?);
9to1.Terminal.ExecuteResolvedAction(resolvedActionID, verification?);
9to1.Terminal.ScheduleAction(sessionID, action, schedule, options?);
9to1.Terminal.CancelScheduledAction(scheduledActionID);
9to1.Terminal.ListEnvironments(options?);
9to1.Terminal.ListShellProfiles(environmentID?);
App/business mutations resolved through Terminal use the owning 9to1 namespace; scheduling, Files, Stack, Dev, Data, credentials and other shared domains remain canonical in their own APIs.
Automation and typed events
Terminal emits typed events such as SessionCreated/Closed, ModeChanged, CommandStarted/Completed, ProcessStarted/Exited, WorkingDirectoryChanged, ConnectionLost/Restored, AIActionResolved/Verified/Executed/Denied, ScheduledActionCreated/Cancelled and guarded integration events.
Events expose stable IDs and permission-scoped metadata. Raw terminal output is not automatically attached to every event; consumers request permitted output ranges explicitly.
Extension system
Terminal participates in the shared 9to1 extension system. Extensions may contribute shell profiles, environment providers, completion providers, semantic recognisers, structured renderers, Terminal-native commands, context providers and integrations.
An extension gains only its declared capabilities. Rendering output or adding completion does not automatically grant process execution, filesystem write, network, credential or AI permissions.
Extension failures are isolated/disableable according to the shared extension-host contract and cannot take down unrelated PTY sessions where avoidable.
Accessibility
Terminal provides keyboard-first operation for tabs/panes, mode switching, command input, history, output search, AI verification and structured result controls.
Screen-reader support exposes command/output group boundaries, prompt/mode state, exit status and meaningful structured result text where platform terminal accessibility APIs permit.
Colour is not the sole signal for elevated session, AI/Command mode, failure, warning or protected action state. Text zoom, high contrast and visible focus are supported.
Performance and resilience
PTY rendering is virtualised/batched to remain responsive under sustained output. One noisy process MUST NOT freeze unrelated Terminal panes or the whole 9to1 shell.
AI resolution, remote connection and structured jobs are cancellable where technically possible and do not block raw PTY input in other sessions.
Terminal crash/restart can restore layout/profile/environment references and retained history according to policy; it does not invent process survival. Live remote/process reconnection occurs only when the provider can prove the original process/session remains available.
Recovery and typed failures
Structured failures include SessionNotFound, ShellUnavailable, EnvironmentUnavailable, EnvironmentDisconnected, PTYCreationFailed, ProcessLaunchFailed, ElevationRequired, CommandRejected, AmbiguousAIIntent, VerificationRequired, PermissionRequired, PermissionDenied, StackGuardViolation, ScheduledActionUnavailable, SSHHostKeyMismatch, CredentialUnavailable, OutputTruncated, ExtensionFailed, RevisionConflict and CapabilityUnavailable plus provider/shell-specific errors.
AI multi-step operations report succeeded, failed, skipped and rolled-back stages where relevant. Terminal MUST NOT claim a command/action completed merely because it was proposed or started.
Failed remote reconnect, scheduled-action creation or app integration leaves explicit recoverable state rather than silently falling back to another environment.
Platform capability behaviour
Windows, 9to1-OS and web preserve the same TerminalSession, mode, AI action and integration model while capability-negotiating local PTY implementation, shells, WSL, OS elevation, SSH/provider and process controls.
Web Terminal requires an authorised remote/server environment provider for real shell execution unless the web platform exposes an approved execution environment. It MUST NOT present browser-side simulation as host terminal access.
When Home is absent at process start, Terminal follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract.
Acceptance requirements
Terminal is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
Command Mode runs representative real interactive PTY applications with ANSI, resize, stdin, signals and full-screen behaviour intact.
The persistent AI / Command switcher changes interpretation mode without losing the same TerminalSession/environment/working directory.
An ordinary command such as git status in Command Mode executes directly without unnecessary LLM mediation.
$Ask "why didn't this command work?" receives scoped failure context and returns advice while performing no process, filesystem, package, app or external mutation.
A suggested command from $Ask is not marked executed until the user separately runs it.
AI Mode resolves a natural-language read-only request into an inspectable typed action/command and executes it according to permission policy.
A dangerous AI request such as shutdown, bulk deletion or privileged configuration displays target, impact/risk and requires the applicable verification/permission before execution.
An ambiguous dangerous natural-language request does not choose a destructive interpretation silently.
Turn off this PC in 10 minutes creates a persistent scheduled action with cancel/edit identity that survives closing the Terminal UI.
Shell/profile discovery shows a missing configured shell/tool with a clear unavailable reason instead of an unexplained spawn failure.
Multiple tabs/splits maintain isolated shell/process/environment state and restoring layout does not rerun historical commands.
An elevated session/operation is visibly/accessibly distinct and AI cannot bypass the platform elevation boundary.
SSH validates host keys, refuses a changed key without explicit resolution and keeps credentials out of routine AI/history output.
Container/WSL/VM/remote sessions expose explicit EnvironmentID so actions cannot silently target the wrong machine.
Dev embeds the same Terminal engine and preserves WorkspaceID/project/toolchain/working-directory context.
A Stack-bound session shows DomainID context; raw Git cannot bypass protected Stack managed refs/Roots/Freezes/lineage.
An AI Stack request routes through 9to1.Stack.* rather than using Git as a hidden substitute.
A Data request uses Data target/write protection and can return an accessible structured result/Open in Data action.
Representative integrations for Files, Boards, Forms, Sites and another registered 9to1 app route through canonical app APIs and Home permission scopes.
The 9to1 CLI bridge and UI/AI action resolve to the same canonical app business operation rather than divergent implementations.
Package installation resolves the active environment/project/package manager and does not silently install into the wrong global environment.
Large output remains responsive with bounded/virtualised scrollback and visibly reports truncation when history is discarded.
Multiline paste protection does not rewrite the accepted command and can prevent accidental immediate execution according to policy.
AI context excludes known secure credential values and uses only the permitted relevant terminal context slice.
History distinguishes proposed, inserted, executed, denied, failed and scheduled AI/shell actions.
Terminal hyperlinks open representative source paths in Dev, files in Files and URLs in Browse without altering raw output.
Long-running processes can be interrupted/terminated and pane closure does not silently kill them contrary to configured behaviour.
Extension-contributed renderer/completion does not implicitly receive process/filesystem/network privileges.
Keyboard/screen-reader workflows cover tabs/panes, switcher, command input, output, $Ask and dangerous-action verification.
Windows, 9to1-OS and web/remote configurations preserve the same canonical Terminal model while capability-negotiating shell execution.
When Home is absent at process start, Terminal follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract.
Mini Computer
Product role and shared virtualisation engine
9-1 Mini Computer is the native CUI virtual-computer and virtual-machine management app and the shared virtualisation engine used by Dev, Terminal and other authorised 9to1 surfaces. It supports creation, installation, import, execution, inspection, configuration, snapshots, cloning, networking, device integration, templates, developer workflows and recovery of supported virtual machines.
Mini Computer owns the canonical VirtualMachine/VirtualisationProvider model and VM lifecycle. Dev owns code/build/debug authoring, Terminal owns terminal sessions, Files owns user-addressable files/media identity and Home owns protected-action permission brokering.
A VM remains a real provider-backed virtual machine. Mini Computer MUST NOT replace mature hypervisor functionality with a simplified simulation merely to obtain a uniform UI.
Built-in default provider: 9to1 VirtualBox fork
The built-in and default provider is a maintained 9to1 fork of the VirtualBox Platform Package source. Mini Computer MUST include this provider so a user can create and run supported VMs without first installing or connecting a third-party hypervisor.
The implementation MUST fork and maintain the latest appropriate VirtualBox source in accordance with the global donor/upstream contract and the applicable open-source licence/third-party licence obligations. The fork remains an auditable upstream-derived backend rather than an opaque binary dependency with no source provenance.
VirtualBox's mature virtual-machine creation, configuration, storage, networking, snapshot, cloning, import/export, console and management behaviours are mandatory donor-parity inputs where supported by the target architecture/platform.
VirtualBox licensing and excluded separately licensed components
The 9to1 fork covers only VirtualBox source/components that CAKE is legally permitted to modify and distribute under their applicable licences. Separately licensed proprietary components such as the Oracle Extension Pack MUST NOT be copied, bundled or represented as part of the fork unless CAKE has obtained the required rights.
If a useful donor capability exists only in a separately licensed component, Mini Computer must either provide a legally independent 9to1-native replacement, support a separately user-installed/connected compatible component where lawful, or expose the capability as unavailable with a documented licensing/platform reason.
The implementation architecture SHOULD keep the fork/provider boundary sufficiently clear for licence compliance, update/rebase management and optional alternative-provider support.
Provider abstraction and optional connected providers
Mini Computer exposes a canonical VirtualisationProvider interface. The built-in 9to1 VirtualBox fork is selected by default, while users may connect/install additional compatible providers such as QEMU, KVM, Windows hypervisor integrations or extension-contributed providers when supported.
Provider has stable ProviderID, type/vendor, version, connection/install state, supported hosts/guest architectures, acceleration capabilities, firmware/security capabilities, device/network/storage features, import/export formats, debug/serial support and Revision.
Connecting another provider does not change the canonical VM semantics automatically. Each VM records ProviderID, and provider migration/conversion is an explicit operation with a preview of unsupported/lossy features.
Provider-specific advanced controls remain accessible through typed provider configuration without leaking arbitrary implementation flags into the canonical cross-provider model.
Provider capability matrix
Every provider reports exact capability state rather than relying on feature hiding alone. Capabilities include supported guest architectures, hardware acceleration, nested virtualisation, snapshots, live snapshots, saved state, cloning, disk formats/controllers, BIOS/UEFI, Secure Boot, TPM, USB/device passthrough, shared folders, clipboard/drag-drop, virtual networking, graphics acceleration, multi-monitor, audio, serial/debug interfaces and live configuration changes.
A setting unsupported by the active provider/platform is marked Unsupported/Unavailable with a reason and remediation/alternative where applicable. Mini Computer MUST NOT accept a setting and silently ignore it.
Capabilities may depend on host architecture and current host configuration, so provider/version support and effective host support are distinct states.
Canonical VirtualMachine model
VirtualMachine has stable VMID, name, ProviderID, EnvironmentID, guest OS metadata, architecture, machine/chipset type, firmware/security configuration, CPU configuration, memory configuration, storage controllers/disks/media, network adapters, display/GPU, audio, USB/devices, integration policy, shared folders, clipboard/drag-drop policy, snapshot graph, template/source provenance, lifecycle state, Files/resource references and Revision.
Renaming, moving in UI or changing provider display labels MUST NOT alter VMID. Provider-internal identifiers are retained as mappings rather than becoming the only canonical identity.
VM configuration is versioned and migratable. Unsupported/unknown future configuration is preserved/rejected explicitly rather than silently dropped.
VM lifecycle states
Canonical lifecycle states include at least PoweredOff, Starting, Running, Pausing, Paused, SavingState, Saved, Resuming, ShuttingDown, Stopping, Crashed, Disconnected/ViewerUnavailable and ProviderUnavailable where distinct.
Viewer state and VM state are separate. Closing or losing a viewer MUST NOT cause the UI to report PoweredOff if the VM remains running.
Lifecycle transitions are driven by verified provider state. Mini Computer MUST NOT report Start/Shutdown/Save successful until the provider confirms the resulting state or the operation explicitly remains Pending.
New VM wizard
Create VM provides a guided workflow for guest OS family/version, architecture, installation media, CPU, RAM, storage, firmware/security, networking and optional unattended installation, with Advanced settings available before creation.
Defaults are recommendations based on detected/selected guest and current host/provider capabilities. Users can review/change them before the VM is created.
Creating a VM is atomic at the user-visible level where possible; partial provider/storage creation is either rolled back or returned with precise created resources and recovery actions.
Guest/ISO detection
When installation media is selected, Mini Computer attempts to detect OS family, edition/version, architecture and boot compatibility using trustworthy metadata/content inspection available without executing the image.
Detected values are recommendations and are shown with confidence/source state where useful. Unknown media remains Unknown rather than being guessed.
Detection may propose suitable CPU, memory, disk, firmware, TPM/Secure Boot and guest-integration settings while preserving user control.
Curated ISO Browser
Mini Computer includes a first-class ISO Browser/Discover OS experience for acquiring trusted operating-system installation media. It is a curated publisher catalogue, not an unrestricted Internet ISO search engine.
Catalogue entries may include operating-system family/distribution, publisher, edition/channel, version, architecture, desktop/server variant, approximate size, source/provider, acquisition policy, integrity metadata availability, licence/redistribution policy and branding/trademark usage metadata where relevant.
Representative trusted publisher sources may include Microsoft, Canonical/Ubuntu, Debian, Fedora, Arch, openSUSE, FreeBSD, 9to1 OS and other audited providers. Addition of a catalogue source requires explicit provider/provenance configuration.
ISO acquisition policies
Every ISO catalogue entry declares one of the canonical acquisition policies or an equivalent explicit policy:
OfficialDirect — the user's Mini Computer downloads from the publisher's authorised source and 9to1 does not rehost the file.
MirrorPermitted — CAKE may mirror/cache the exact permitted unmodified image only when redistribution rights/policy expressly allow it and all required licence/notices/provenance are preserved.
UserSupplied — Mini Computer can identify/configure the guest but the user must select media they already lawfully possess.
ProviderFlow — acquisition requires a publisher-specific authenticated/licensed/download flow that Mini Computer opens or integrates without bypassing its conditions.
An OS being open source does not by itself authorise ISO redistribution or logo/trademark use. Acquisition/mirroring and branding rights are evaluated separately.
ISO download, integrity and provenance
Downloaded/registerable installation media uses stable ISOImageID/MediaID and records publisher/source, product/version/architecture, acquisition provider/URL reference, Files identity, cryptographic digest/signature state, download timestamp, redistribution/acquisition policy, licence/provenance metadata and Revision.
When the publisher provides authoritative checksum/signature information, Mini Computer verifies it before labelling the download Verified. A mismatch blocks automatic VM creation/use until the user deliberately handles the failed integrity state.
If trustworthy verification data is unavailable, the UI states Integrity not independently verified rather than inventing trust.
One immutable ISO can be referenced by multiple VMs without creating duplicate copies unnecessarily.
ISO Browser user flow
A supported catalogue flow can perform Select OS → choose version/architecture → acquire from authorised source → verify integrity → register media → create/configure VM → mount media → boot installer.
The user can inspect the source/publisher and acquisition policy before download. Any required login/product/licence flow remains the publisher's official flow.
Open local ISO/import media remains available for images not represented in the curated catalogue.
Media library and cleanup
Mini Computer exposes reusable installation media through a media library backed by Files/provider storage. Media usage shows which VMs currently reference/mount the item.
Removing media does not delete installed VM disks. If the medium is still mounted or required for a configured boot workflow, deletion/removal shows the affected VMs and requires appropriate confirmation.
Derived download caches can be cleaned independently from canonical retained media where provenance/re-download permits.
Unattended installation
Where the guest/provider supports it, users may opt into unattended OS installation. Configuration can include hostname, locale, time zone, user/account setup, product/licence information where required, disk install choices and guest integration installation.
Passwords/product keys and equivalent sensitive values use secure credential/secret handling rather than being written into logs, screenshots, AI context or plain project metadata.
Manual installation is always available and remains the fallback when unattended flow is unsupported or fails.
Interactive VM viewer
Running VMs can open in an interactive Mini Computer viewer supporting keyboard, pointer capture/release, scaling, fullscreen, aspect handling, dynamic resolution when guest integration supports it and multi-monitor when the provider supports it.
The viewer may be embedded or popped out to a dedicated window while retaining the same VMID/session state.
Viewer disconnect/reconnect is separate from VM lifecycle and must not power off or duplicate the VM unless explicitly requested.
Power and state controls
Mini Computer distinguishes Start, Pause, Resume, Save State, ACPI/Guest Shutdown, Restart/Reset where supported and Power Off/Force Stop. The UI/API MUST NOT label destructive power-off as graceful shutdown.
Potential data-loss actions such as Power Off while a guest is running receive risk-appropriate confirmation unless a valid trust/policy explicitly covers them.
Power actions are idempotent or return AlreadyInState/InvalidState semantics rather than creating contradictory provider operations.
Snapshots
Snapshots are first-class canonical objects with stable SnapshotID, VMID, parent SnapshotID, name, description, creation time, provider reference, disk/memory-state coverage, guest state, size/retention metadata and Revision.
Users can create, inspect, restore, rename/descriptively edit where supported and delete/consolidate snapshots. Snapshot hierarchy is shown as a tree/graph rather than a flat list.
Restore explicitly states which disk/memory/config state is affected and what current unsaved state will be lost. External/shared resources not captured by the snapshot are clearly excluded.
Deleting/consolidating a snapshot MUST NOT silently delete a dependent branch/linked clone.
Cloning and linked clones
Mini Computer supports full clone and provider-supported linked clone from current state or a selected snapshot. Clone receives a new stable VMID and clear provenance.
Linked-clone dependency on base disks/snapshots is visible. Deleting/moving a required base is blocked or performs a deliberate consolidation/migration first.
Clone options include identity/network regeneration where needed to avoid duplicate machine identifiers.
Virtual disks and block storage
Mini Computer supports provider-compatible disk formats such as VDI plus supported VHD/VHDX, VMDK, QCOW2 and raw images through the active provider/conversion layer.
Disk operations include create, attach/detach, resize where safe, compact where supported, clone, convert/import/export, inspect and delete.
VirtualDisk has stable DiskID, provider reference, format/type, logical/physical size, backing/base relationship, encryption state where supported, Files/storage-provider identity, attached VM/controller references and Revision.
Destructive resize/shrink/delete/raw-device operations require explicit validation and risk-appropriate verification.
Storage controllers and boot order
Mini Computer exposes provider-supported controllers such as NVMe, SATA, SCSI and legacy IDE/other controllers when required. Optical/floppy media appears only where supported/meaningful.
Normal VM creation configures conventional controller topology automatically; Advanced settings expose the real attachment slots/controllers.
Boot order and one-time boot choices are explicit. Mounting a new ISO MUST NOT silently rewrite persistent boot policy unless requested.
CPU and memory configuration
VM settings include virtual CPU count/topology where supported, RAM and provider-specific advanced execution/CPU capabilities such as execution cap or nested virtualisation.
Mini Computer warns when requested allocation is likely to leave insufficient host resources or exceeds provider/host capabilities. It must not silently overcommit resources while presenting them as guaranteed.
Settings that require VM shutdown are marked Requires shutdown; supported live changes show real applied/pending state.
Firmware, Secure Boot and TPM
Mini Computer supports BIOS/legacy firmware and UEFI according to provider capabilities, plus Secure Boot and virtual TPM where supported.
Guest templates/detection can recommend required firmware/security configuration, especially for modern operating systems, while exposing the actual setting.
TPM/Secure Boot backing state is included in snapshot/export/migration semantics only where the provider guarantees it; otherwise exclusions are explicit.
Networking
VM networking supports provider-capable modes such as NAT, bridged, host-only, internal/private, NAT network/custom virtual network and disconnected state.
Each VirtualNetworkAdapter has stable AdapterID, mode/network binding, virtual NIC type, MAC configuration, cable/link state, port-forward rules and Revision.
NAT port forwarding exposes host address/port, guest address/port and protocol and validates collisions before applying.
Virtual network manager
Mini Computer includes a network-management surface for provider-defined NAT networks, host-only networks, internal/private networks, DHCP ranges, forwarding and adapters.
Deleting/modifying a network lists dependent VMs/adapters and blocks or migrates them explicitly rather than leaving hidden broken references.
Bridged network/device selection is capability- and permission-aware and does not silently expose a VM to external networks.
USB and device passthrough
Where provider/platform support exists, users may attach/detach USB devices and configure explicit passthrough/filter policies. Additional PCI/GPU/device passthrough is exposed only through providers with a supported implementation.
Attaching a physical device that becomes unavailable to the host is communicated before execution. Auto-attach rules identify exactly which VM/device criteria they affect.
Device passthrough is treated as a high-trust boundary; Mini Computer does not grant broad host-device access to untrusted guests by default.
Display and graphics
Display configuration can expose virtual display controller, VRAM, monitor count, scaling, 2D/3D acceleration and provider-supported graphics features.
Ordinary virtual graphics acceleration is distinct from physical GPU passthrough. The latter uses its own provider/security/capability requirements.
Unsupported graphics settings remain visibly unavailable rather than being written into configuration and ignored.
Audio and microphone
Mini Computer exposes guest audio output/input routing where supported. Microphone input follows host privacy/device permission rules and MUST NOT silently activate because the VM starts.
Per-VM audio policy can disable input/output entirely for untrusted/test guests.
Clipboard and drag/drop trust policy
Shared clipboard and drag/drop support provider/guest-integration capabilities and explicit policies such as Disabled, HostToGuest, GuestToHost and Bidirectional.
These capabilities are disabled or conservatively configured by default according to security policy for untrusted guests. Guest integration installation alone MUST NOT silently enable bidirectional host data access.
Clipboard/drag-drop state is visible while the VM is running.
Shared folders
Users can expose host/Files-backed folders to guests through stable SharedFolder configurations with host/File identity, guest name/mount path, read-only/read-write, auto-mount and persistence policy.
Writable host sharing is a security boundary because guest software can modify host/user data. The UI/AI verification must make writable scope clear.
Deleting/moving a shared host resource resolves through Files identity where possible or leaves an explicit BrokenBinding state.
Guest integrations
Mini Computer detects and, where lawfully distributable/supported, can install appropriate guest integration tooling for dynamic resolution, clipboard, drag/drop, shared folders, guest status/shutdown and file transfer.
Guest integration version/health is visible. The VM remains operable when integrations are unavailable.
Mini Computer MUST NOT bundle separately licensed donor guest components without the necessary rights.
Import and export
Mini Computer supports import/export of mature provider formats such as OVF/OVA and supported virtual-disk formats through the active provider/conversion layer.
Import previews guest OS metadata, CPU/RAM, disks, networks, device requirements, unsupported features and resulting provider mapping before creation.
Export records exact VM revision/snapshot/configuration scope and warns about excluded secrets, external disks/shared folders/device state.
Templates and reusable machine profiles
Users can save reusable VM templates/profiles for common environments such as Windows testing, Linux development, server labs or 9to1-OS development.
Template has stable TemplateID, guest/provider requirements, hardware defaults, media/acquisition references, optional bootstrap/unattended settings and Revision.
Instantiating a template creates a new VM identity. The template itself is not accidentally run/mutated as an ordinary machine unless explicitly converted.
First-party guest templates
Mini Computer may ship configuration templates for common operating systems without bundling proprietary installation images unless distribution rights permit it.
A template may state ISO required and route the user into the ISO Browser/provider flow rather than implying the operating system is included.
Templates are updated independently from the hypervisor and preserve backward compatibility for already-created VMs.
Files and storage architecture
User-addressable Mini Computer resources are organised in Files through stable identities, conceptually including Machines, Disks, ISOs/Media, Templates and Exports. Exact physical layout may vary by storage provider but remains user-inspectable where appropriate.
Very large mutable virtual disks/snapshot chains may use a block/storage provider optimised for VM workloads rather than ordinary sync semantics. Provider-internal block state is not misrepresented as a normal small Files document.
Canonical VM/resource metadata records the mapping between user-visible Files resources and provider-internal storage so recovery/migration can distinguish source/configuration from derived/provider state.
Resource references and deduplication
Immutable installation media can be shared by reference across VMs. Linked/base virtual disks preserve explicit dependency identity rather than being duplicated or lost through path renames.
Moving/renaming a Files-backed ISO/export/template through supported Files/Mini Computer actions preserves references by stable ID.
Provider caches, temporary differencing layers and ephemeral development disks are marked derived/ephemeral and can be cleaned without deleting canonical user resources unless explicitly selected.
Terminal integration
Every supported VM can expose Open in Terminal for guest shell/SSH where configured, serial console, debug console or provider-supported command channel. This uses the shared Terminal engine.
Terminal creates/attaches an EnvironmentID tied to VMID/provider/guest channel and visibly identifies the VM so commands cannot be mistaken for host commands.
Closing Terminal does not power off the VM; VM lifecycle remains owned by Mini Computer.
Dev integration and Run target
Dev uses Mini Computer as the canonical VM runtime for projects whose RunConfiguration targets a VM. Dev MUST NOT maintain a parallel private hypervisor implementation.
For OS/kernel projects, Run can execute Build → package boot artifact → obtain/start configured Mini Computer VM → attach disk/ISO/EFI/kernel artifact → boot → expose viewer/serial/debug state.
Run configuration references stable VM/template/provider identities and can declare reset/snapshot/discard policy for repeatable development.
Ephemeral development VMs
Dev/CI can request ephemeral VMs derived from templates/snapshots for isolated testing. Policy can specify discard after success, preserve on failure, always preserve or snapshot-before-run.
Ephemeral instances receive unique VMID/runtime identity even when created from the same template and do not mutate the reusable template/base unintentionally.
Cleanup waits until logs/artifacts/checks referencing the ephemeral environment are retained or explicitly discarded.
OS/kernel debugging integration
Mini Computer exposes provider-supported serial ports/consoles, debug stubs, reset/power control, boot logs and low-level debug channels through typed capabilities.
Dev owns source-level debugger UI such as breakpoints, symbols, registers/memory/disassembly mapping where supported; Mini Computer supplies the VM/provider channel and exact machine state.
Debug integration records the source VM/revision/artifact mapping so Dev cannot accidentally attach symbols from an unrelated build.
Headless operation
VMs may run without an open viewer. Closing Mini Computer follows explicit/configured behaviour such as Keep running, Save state or Ask; it does not inherently terminate a VM.
A background/service component owns provider sessions that must survive the UI process. Reopening Mini Computer discovers/reattaches to existing provider VMs instead of creating duplicates.
User logout/system shutdown semantics are platform-specific and exposed clearly when background VM continuation is unavailable.
Provider and host virtualisation status
Mini Computer includes Virtualisation Status showing selected/default provider, provider install/driver/service state, hardware virtualisation availability, acceleration state, nested virtualisation, host architecture and key feature capability status.
Common blockers such as disabled hardware virtualisation, unavailable provider driver/service, architecture mismatch, acceleration conflict or unsupported host configuration are surfaced with actionable diagnostics rather than opaque provider codes.
Where the built-in VirtualBox fork conflicts with another host hypervisor configuration, Mini Computer reports the specific capability degradation/conflict and supported resolution options.
Resource monitoring
Running VM views expose provider-backed CPU, allocated/used memory where available, disk activity, network activity, uptime and relevant guest/provider health metrics.
Host overview can aggregate VM resource consumption. Unknown/unavailable metrics remain explicitly unavailable rather than estimated and displayed as measurements.
Monitoring is virtualised/streamed to avoid high overhead with many running VMs.
AI / Dulche integration
Dulche context can include VMID, ProviderID/version, lifecycle state, guest metadata, hardware configuration, attached media/disks, network state, snapshot tree, integration state, current diagnostics, Dev/Terminal bindings and Revision subject to permissions.
AI requests such as create a Windows test VM, take a snapshot before this kernel test, explain why boot failed or add disk capacity resolve to typed Mini Computer/provider actions.
AI MUST NOT hide consequential operations behind generic wording. Disk deletion/shrink, snapshot restore, raw-device attachment, writable shared-folder exposure, device passthrough, bridged networking and provider installation/configuration receive the applicable verification/risk treatment.
Safety and high-risk operations
High-risk classes include deleting/overwriting virtual disks, destructive snapshot restore/consolidation, raw host-disk access, physical device/GPU passthrough, writable host sharing, privileged provider installation/driver changes, security-device changes and network changes that materially expose the guest/host.
Impact previews identify VM, affected disks/snapshots/devices/files/networks and whether the operation is reversible where determinable.
Mini Computer cannot use opaque desktop automation to click provider UIs when a typed provider/API operation exists.
Mini Computer API
Mini Computer's first-party API catalogue is exhaustive under the global API-parity rule. Minimum canonical entry points include:
9to1.MiniComputer.ListProviders(options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.GetProviderCapabilities(providerID, hostContext?);
9to1.MiniComputer.SetDefaultProvider(providerID);
9to1.MiniComputer.ConnectProvider(providerConfig);
9to1.MiniComputer.CreateVM(config);
9to1.MiniComputer.ImportVM(source, config?);
9to1.MiniComputer.CloneVM(vmID, config);
9to1.MiniComputer.GetVM(vmID);
9to1.MiniComputer.ListVMs(options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.UpdateVM(vmID, patch, options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.Start(vmID, options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.Pause(vmID);
9to1.MiniComputer.Resume(vmID);
9to1.MiniComputer.Shutdown(vmID, options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.Restart(vmID, options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.PowerOff(vmID, verification?);
9to1.MiniComputer.SaveState(vmID);
9to1.MiniComputer.OpenConsole(vmID, options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.CreateDisk(config);
9to1.MiniComputer.AttachDisk(vmID, diskID, attachment);
9to1.MiniComputer.ResizeDisk(diskID, newSize, options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.AttachMedia(vmID, mediaID, attachment?);
9to1.MiniComputer.CreateSnapshot(vmID, config?);
9to1.MiniComputer.RestoreSnapshot(snapshotID, options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.DeleteSnapshot(snapshotID, options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.ConfigureNetwork(vmID, networkConfig);
9to1.MiniComputer.AttachDevice(vmID, deviceID, options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.ConfigureSharedFolder(vmID, config);
9to1.MiniComputer.CreateTemplate(sourceVMOrConfig, config?);
9to1.MiniComputer.ExportVM(vmID, config);
9to1.MiniComputer.ListISOCatalogue(query?);
9to1.MiniComputer.GetISOEntry(entryID);
9to1.MiniComputer.AcquireISO(entryID, options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.RegisterMedia(fileOrUri, metadata?);
9to1.MiniComputer.VerifyMedia(mediaID, options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.GetMetrics(vmID, options?);
9to1.MiniComputer.GetVirtualisationStatus(options?);
Terminal, Dev, Files, credentials and Home permissions remain canonical in their owning namespaces.
Automation and typed events
Mini Computer emits typed events such as VMCreated/Updated/Deleted, VMStateChanged, SnapshotCreated/Restored/Deleted, ProviderConnected/Unavailable, MediaAcquisitionStarted/Completed/Failed, MediaVerificationChanged, DeviceAttached/Detached, NetworkChanged, MetricsUpdated and provider/guest integration events.
Events use stable IDs and avoid embedding secret credentials or unbounded VM console output. Consumers request additional permitted data explicitly.
Extension system
Mini Computer participates in the shared 9to1 extension platform. Extensions may contribute VirtualisationProvider implementations, ISO catalogue/acquisition providers, guest templates/integration providers, device/network/storage adapters, inspectors and diagnostics.
Provider extensions declare host/platform compatibility, required privileges and permissions. Installing a provider UI extension does not automatically grant kernel driver, raw-disk, device or network privileges.
Provider failure is isolated where feasible and does not corrupt unrelated VM canonical metadata.
Accessibility
VM list, create wizard, settings, snapshots, networks, ISO Browser, provider status and power controls are keyboard-operable with screen-reader semantics.
VM lifecycle/provider/security state MUST NOT rely solely on colour or icons. Dangerous Power Off/Delete/Restore/Raw device actions have explicit accessible labels and consequences.
The embedded viewer provides accessible host controls around the guest even when guest OS accessibility itself is outside Mini Computer's control.
Performance and scalability
VM lists, snapshots, ISO/media libraries and monitoring views are virtualised/paged where needed. UI rendering MUST NOT require loading every virtual disk/snapshot into memory.
Provider operations such as import/export, clone, disk conversion, large download, snapshot consolidation and migration run as cancellable/resumable jobs where the provider supports it, with stable JobID/progress/error state.
Mini Computer remains responsive while one or more VMs generate heavy I/O or console output.
Recovery and failure behaviour
Mini Computer distinguishes viewer disconnect, provider service failure, VM crash, host-resource exhaustion, disk/media missing, storage corruption and configuration incompatibility rather than collapsing them into VM failed.
Reopening after UI crash/restart re-discovers provider-managed running/saved VMs by stable mapping and reattaches without duplication where the provider can prove identity.
Structured failures include VMNotFound, ProviderUnavailable, ProviderCapabilityUnavailable, HardwareVirtualisationUnavailable, AccelerationUnavailable, InvalidVMState, DiskNotFound, DiskDependencyBlocked, MediaNotFound, MediaIntegrityFailed, MediaAcquisitionNotPermitted, SnapshotDependencyBlocked, SnapshotRestoreConflict, NetworkConflict, DeviceUnavailable, HostResourceRisk, CredentialUnavailable, ImportUnsupported, ExportFailed, ViewerDisconnected, GuestIntegrationUnavailable, RevisionConflict, PermissionDenied and CapabilityUnavailable plus provider-specific diagnostic codes.
Partial provider/storage operations return succeeded/failed/remaining resources and recovery steps; Mini Computer MUST NOT report rollback/cleanup success unless verified.
Platform capability behaviour
Windows, 9to1-OS and other supported desktop hosts preserve the same canonical VM/provider/media model while capability-negotiating the built-in VirtualBox fork, hardware acceleration, host networking, device passthrough and filesystem/storage behaviour.
Web surfaces may manage/view remote Mini Computer providers/VMs when an authorised remote execution provider exists but MUST NOT pretend the browser itself can provide unrestricted local hardware virtualisation.
Unsupported architecture/provider combinations are explicit release/platform exceptions rather than silent missing UI.
When Home is absent at process start, Mini Computer follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract.
Acceptance requirements
Mini Computer is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
The maintained 9to1 VirtualBox fork is available as the built-in/default provider and a new supported VM can be created without connecting another hypervisor.
The VirtualBox donor-parity audit records preserved/expanded/replaced/not-applicable mature VM capabilities and separately licensed proprietary components are not silently bundled.
A user can connect at least one alternative provider implementation through the VirtualisationProvider contract and provider capability differences are surfaced accurately.
A VM retains stable VMID across rename/reopen and provider-internal identity is mapped rather than becoming the only identity.
A supported guest can be created, install media attached, started, installed, shut down, reopened and run again without configuration loss.
Start, Pause, Resume, Save State, graceful Shutdown and Power Off have distinct verified lifecycle semantics.
Closing/disconnecting the viewer leaves a headless-running VM running according to policy and reopening Mini Computer reconnects rather than creating a duplicate.
Snapshot creation/restoration preserves the provider-declared disk/memory state and clearly excludes state the provider cannot capture.
Deleting/consolidating snapshots cannot silently break a dependent linked clone.
Full clone and provider-supported linked clone create distinct VM identities and preserve base dependencies correctly.
Representative virtual-disk create/attach/resize/convert/delete operations preserve dependencies and require appropriate verification for destructive changes.
BIOS/UEFI and supported Secure Boot/TPM configurations are represented accurately for a representative modern guest.
NAT, bridged/host-only/private and representative port-forward configuration work on a capable provider and network dependencies block unsafe deletion.
Clipboard, drag/drop and shared folders enforce configured direction/read-write policy rather than enabling broad host access automatically.
Physical device passthrough exposes the host-impact warning/permission and does not silently detach devices from the host.
Provider/host Virtualisation Status distinguishes disabled hardware acceleration, provider unavailable and feature unsupported states with actionable diagnostics.
The ISO Browser lists only registered/curated publisher providers rather than arbitrary unverified Internet downloads.
An OfficialDirect ISO acquisition downloads from the publisher-authorised source without CAKE rehosting it and records acquisition provenance.
A MirrorPermitted catalogue entry can be mirrored only when its configured redistribution policy explicitly permits the exact image; otherwise mirroring is blocked.
A downloaded ISO with authoritative checksum/signature metadata is verified before being labelled Verified and a mismatch blocks normal trusted acquisition flow.
UserSupplied and ProviderFlow catalogue policies work without falsely claiming CAKE supplies the operating system image.
The same immutable ISO can be referenced by multiple VMs without unnecessary duplicate canonical copies and removal identifies active mounts/dependencies.
Unattended installation keeps passwords/product keys out of ordinary logs, project source and AI context.
OVF/OVA or representative mature donor import/export previews hardware/network differences and preserves the declared source/revision scope.
Mini Computer Files resources remain addressable while large mutable block data can use an appropriate provider without being misrepresented as ordinary sync documents.
Terminal opens a VM-specific EnvironmentID/serial or guest shell and clearly distinguishes VM from host command execution.
Dev OS Run uses Mini Computer's canonical engine to build/package → attach boot artifact → boot VM → expose viewer/serial/debug state rather than launching a separate hidden hypervisor.
An ephemeral Dev VM can be discarded/preserved according to run policy without mutating the base template.
AI VM actions route through typed Mini Computer/provider APIs and dangerous disk/snapshot/device/network operations receive the applicable impact verification.
Import/export/download/clone/snapshot consolidation jobs report real progress/cancellation/recovery state without fabricating completion.
Keyboard/screen-reader workflows cover VM creation, ISO Browser, VM state controls, settings, snapshots and provider status.
Windows, 9to1-OS and supported remote/web management preserve the same canonical Mini Computer model while capability-negotiating local execution.
When Home is absent at process start, Mini Computer follows the global Install Home/bootstrap contract.
Utilities
Browse
9to1 Browse is a full Firefox-derived browser product with native CUI chrome and native CUI internal surfaces. Firefox/Gecko is the primary donor, default web engine and behavioural baseline. Chromium/Blink is a first-class secondary browser/rendering backend available per tab. Browse MUST remain one coherent browser with one canonical 9to1-owned tab/session model; Chromium support MUST NOT be implemented as a second browser bolted onto Firefox or as a separate user profile universe.
Donor authority and parity
Firefox donor parity is the minimum supported capability set, not the finished feature ceiling. Unless a feature is explicitly replaced, excluded or made incompatible by an approved 9to1 architecture decision, Browse MUST retain mature Firefox functionality and quality-of-life behaviour.
Tabs and windows, including restore/reopen behaviour, pinned tabs and normal navigation history.
Profiles, bookmarks, history, downloads, browsing-data controls, site permissions, privacy/security controls and appropriate password/passkey integration.
Firefox developer tooling, reader/media functionality, picture-in-picture where donor-supported, accessibility, keyboard navigation, crash/session recovery and mature settings/configuration.
WebExtension compatibility to the maximum extent supported by the retained Firefox APIs, with unsupported or engine-specific APIs surfaced explicitly rather than silently ignored.
All Firefox proprietary or embedded AI surfaces are non-authoritative and MUST be removed or replaced by Dulche-backed 9to1 surfaces. The agent MUST NOT preserve a Firefox AI sidebar, chatbot, assistant or proprietary AI integration merely for donor parity.
Web engine architecture
Each web BrowserTab selects a WebEngine value of Firefox/Gecko or Chromium/Blink. The normal user-facing choice SHOULD be labelled Firefox and Chromium; implementation and diagnostics MAY additionally expose the underlying Gecko and Blink engine names. Gecko is the default unless the user or a persisted site rule selects Chromium.
Changing a tab between Firefox and Chromium changes the renderer/backend used for the page, not the canonical identity of the tab, workspace or Browse session. Switching engines reloads/reconstructs the document through the selected backend. Engine-private runtime state such as DOM objects, JavaScript heaps and renderer-process memory is not required to transfer.
Browse MUST own canonical higher-level browser entities instead of allowing Gecko and Chromium to directly share raw profile databases. At minimum the architecture must model BrowserProfile, BrowserTab, NavigationEntry, Bookmark, HistoryEntry, Download, SitePermission, Workspace, TabGroup, SplitView, SearchProvider, SiteEnhancer and EnginePreference as typed 9to1-owned entities or equivalent strongly typed contracts.
Gecko and Chromium MUST be isolated internally. They MUST NOT be pointed at the same physical cookie/profile/session database. Engine adapters translate the relevant canonical Browse state into each backend and propagate supported changes back to Browse.
Users MUST be able to use Firefox for this tab, Chromium for this tab, always Firefox for a site/domain, always Chromium for a site/domain, and reset a persisted site engine preference. A broken page SHOULD be switchable to the other engine with one obvious action without opening a separate browser product.
Automatic upstream maintenance
The Firefox/Gecko and Chromium/Blink frameworks MUST be maintained continuously against the latest appropriate upstream release and MUST automatically detect and ingest newer upstream versions when available. A long-lived stale engine is a maintenance defect.
Automatic update does not mean blindly shipping an unvalidated upstream binary. The update pipeline MUST fetch/rebase or reapply maintained 9to1 changes, build the affected engine integration, run Browse compatibility and regression suites, verify CUI integration, engine switching, extension baselines, session/profile isolation, Site Enhancer behaviour, DevTools integration and Dulche browser capabilities, and promote the new engine only after the applicable acceptance gates pass. Security-sensitive upstream releases receive expedited priority. The previous known-good engine build MUST remain rollback-capable until promotion is proven stable.
CUI and URI namespace contract
Browse has four distinct first-class content namespaces. They MUST remain architecturally and security-distinct even when multiple namespaces ultimately render through CUI.
cui:// — generic CUI-rendered surfaces and extension-defined/custom CUI pages. This is the general CUI namespace and is not synonymous with Browse internals.
browse:// — Browse-owned internal pages such as browse://newtab, browse://settings, browse://downloads, browse://history, browse://extensions and other Browse-owned management surfaces.
9to1:// — native 9to1 application surfaces hosted inside a Browse tab, for example 9to1://Spaces, 9to1://Write or a typed deep link such as 9to1://Write/<resource>. These are the actual application surfaces, not web versions or reduced browser copies.
https:// and http:// — ordinary web content. User-facing normal web navigation uses these web schemes; Browse-owned, CUI and native-app content MUST NOT masquerade as an HTTP(S) origin.
Internal compatibility plumbing inherited from donors MAY exist only where technically unavoidable, but it MUST NOT be exposed as a competing public routing model. The 9to1 routing contract above is authoritative.
Native 9to1 app surfaces in tabs
Opening 9to1://<App> MUST instantiate the real CUI application surface and the real application services inside the Browse tab. It MUST NOT load a separately implemented web edition, feature-reduced embedded edition or imitation of the app. Responsive layout adaptation is allowed and expected; capability divergence merely because the app is hosted in Browse is not.
9to1:// routes MUST be registered centrally by the application/router registry and support typed deep links to canonical resources where the owning app supports them. A tab title and icon should reflect the actual resource/app instead of exposing an opaque route string as its primary label.
The same canonical app data/state MUST be addressed regardless of whether the app is opened in its normal standalone surface or through 9to1:// in Browse. Opening the same Write document, Board, Space or Data workbook in multiple valid surfaces MUST NOT silently create disconnected copies.
9to1 native app tabs participate in normal Browse capabilities including tab groups, pinning, workspaces, restore/reopen and Split View. A user can therefore place 9to1://Write with a research document beside an https:// research page, or combine two different native 9to1 apps, without requiring a separate web version of either app.
Profiles and workspaces
Browser profiles are tab-scoped, not window-scoped. Every BrowserTab carries a ProfileID or equivalent profile context, allowing one window, one workspace and one Split View to contain tabs from different profiles simultaneously.
A BrowserProfile is an identity/storage/privacy boundary. Depending on supported configuration, it owns or scopes cookies, login sessions, site storage, site permissions, browsing-data attribution, extensions and extension state, search preferences, Site Enhancers, credentials/passkeys and other profile-specific browser configuration.
A Workspace is an organisational/session construct rather than an identity boundary. A workspace may contain tabs from multiple profiles and owns organisational state such as open tabs, groups, split arrangements, workspace pins and layout. Switching workspace MUST NOT inherently sign the user into or out of websites.
Profile identity MUST be visually discoverable on tabs and in relevant browser UI so the user can tell which account/session context will be used. Consequential actions and Dulche-controlled actions SHOULD make the active profile context clear where confusion could cause the action to occur under the wrong identity.
Changing a tab to another profile MUST reopen/recreate its web session under the destination profile rather than copying authentication material across profile boundaries. Safe navigation/organisation metadata such as URL, group, workspace and split position may be preserved where applicable.
Tabs, groups and placement
Browse MUST provide modern tab management in addition to Firefox donor parity. Tab groups are first-class canonical entities with stable identity, naming, optional colour/icon metadata, collapse/expand state, persistence, restore, drag/drop and movement between windows/workspaces. Dulche and other typed APIs can address a group directly.
Tab-strip placement MUST be a first-class configurable preference with full feature parity in all four orientations:
Horizontal tabs at the top.
Horizontal tabs at the bottom.
Vertical tabs on the left.
Vertical tabs on the right.
The interface MUST adapt properly to each orientation rather than mechanically moving a top strip. Groups, pinned tabs, profile indicators, drag/reorder, tab search, previews, context menus, engine state where surfaced, close/reopen, Dulche mentions and split operations MUST remain functional in every orientation. Compact/collapsed and appropriate auto-expand behaviours may be provided as configurable presentation options.
Split View
Split View displays two independent BrowserTab entities side-by-side in one browser content area with a resizable divider. The split container owns presentation only; each pane remains a real tab with its own URL/route, navigation history, profile, renderer/backend where applicable and canonical tab identity.
A split may mix any compatible tab surface classes, including web + web, 9to1 app + web, 9to1 app + 9to1 app, Browse internal + web and tabs from different BrowserProfiles. Either pane can be swapped, unsplit or moved without destroying the underlying tab.
The two-pane experience is the required baseline. The architecture SHOULD avoid assumptions that make future multi-pane layouts impossible, but more than two panes is not required unless separately specified.
New Tab canvas
browse://newtab is a fully customisable CUI-native canvas rather than a fixed shortcut grid. Users can add, remove, move, resize and configure components. Layout persists according to the active profile and may support workspace-specific overrides where configured.
The canvas can host deterministic widgets, browser widgets, 9to1 app widgets, extension-provided CUI widgets, static content and Generative Areas. It SHOULD reuse shared 9to1 canvas/layout infrastructure where practical instead of creating an incompatible bespoke layout system.
A Generative Area is a persistent container defined by a natural-language instruction, for example 'put some YouTube videos here for me to watch' or 'show my upcoming deadlines'. It stores the instruction/configuration, not merely one frozen model answer. It may refresh manually, on New Tab open or on an allowed schedule and may expose source restrictions, maximum item count, presentation style and network/Dulche permissions.
Generative Areas MUST resolve real canonical entities when the requested content refers to tabs, Files, events, 9to1 objects or other structured data. They MUST NOT fabricate canonical objects merely to fill a container. Generated/recommended content SHOULD remain distinguishable from deterministic widget output.
Search and AI entry
The primary New Tab/address search entry MUST expose two explicit modes: Search and AI. Search is the default. The active mode is clearly visible and switchable quickly, including by keyboard.
Search mode performs normal navigation/search behaviour and MUST NOT invoke an LLM merely to execute an ordinary URL or provider query. AI mode sends the request to Dulche and can use permissioned Browse capabilities and referenced browser/app context.
Browse MUST support a typed SearchProvider contract and allow the user to configure a default provider plus an optional secondary provider. Providers may supply query construction, suggestions and declared privacy/capability metadata. Extension-defined providers may participate through the same contract.
Browse MUST support searching two providers at once. Dual-provider search creates one real tab per provider for the same query and places those tabs into the standard Split View, one provider per pane. This MUST reuse normal BrowserTab and SplitView infrastructure rather than a bespoke dual-search renderer. Single-provider search remains the normal default unless the user configures otherwise.
Dulche browser experience
Dulche is the only authoritative AI system in Browse. Firefox-provided proprietary AI surfaces MUST be removed/replaced. Browse SHOULD provide both a persistent Dulche sidebar for larger tasks and a lightweight floating/command bar for contextual requests, using the shared Dulche runtime rather than launching a browser-specific model server.
The Dulche UI MUST support @-mentioning canonical browser context. At minimum users can mention tabs and SHOULD be able to mention tab groups, workspaces, split panes and other supported Browse entities. Mention autocomplete resolves to stable canonical IDs rather than copying only titles/URLs into the prompt.
Examples include comparing @Durham with @York, summarising all tabs in @Coursework, or asking Dulche to use a referenced 9to1://Write document together with an https:// research tab. Where the referenced surface is a native 9to1 app, Dulche MUST use that app's semantic APIs rather than screen-scraping its CUI.
Permissioned autonomous browsing
With explicit user permission, Dulche can autonomously operate Browse for a task. A request such as 'scroll through YouTube and pick out some good videos' may inspect visible/accessible results, scroll, open candidates, compare them and return recommendations without requiring confirmation for every benign intermediate interaction.
Permission scope MUST be explicit and composable. The implementation must support equivalents of read this page, control this tab, control these selected tabs and control Browse for this task. Granting one scope MUST NOT silently grant permanent global browser control.
Browser automation SHOULD use structured semantic capabilities such as Navigate, OpenTab, CloseTab, ActivateTab, ReadPage, ReadElement, Find, Scroll, Click, FillField, SelectOption, GoBack, GoForward and Reload when structured control exists. Blind coordinate input is a fallback, not the primary architecture.
Consequential external actions remain governed by the shared 9to1 permission/confirmation policy. Purchases, publishing/sending, destructive account changes, security changes, credential disclosure/entry and comparable external side effects MUST NOT become implicitly authorised merely because Dulche was permitted to browse.
Extensions and CUI extension surfaces
Firefox/WebExtension compatibility MUST be retained to the maximum practical extent. Because a tab may use Firefox/Gecko or Chromium/Blink, extension capability MUST be explicit. An extension may be Gecko-compatible, Chromium-compatible through supported adapters, compatible with both, Browse/CUI-only, partially compatible or unsupported in the active engine.
Switching one tab to Chromium MUST NOT silently uninstall an extension, disable it globally or make it disappear. Engine-specific limitations MUST be surfaced predictably.
Extensions can register supported CUI surfaces using cui:// routing and the extension CUI API, including settings pages, dashboards, sidebars, tool panels, New Tab components or other permitted custom pages. CUI rendering permission does not imply unrestricted Browse or 9to1 internal access; capabilities remain sandboxed and permission-scoped.
Site Enhancer
Browse MUST provide a first-class Site Enhancer feature inspired by mature site-customisation systems such as Arc Boosts while remaining a 9to1-native capability. A SiteEnhancer is a versioned, enable/disable-able canonical object associated with one or more domain/site match patterns.
Site Enhancers can define supported visual customisation such as colours, typography, spacing/layout adjustments, element visibility, backgrounds and custom CSS, plus controlled client-side behaviour/scripts where explicitly supported. They must declare permissions/capabilities and execute within a defined safety boundary.
Dulche can help create or modify a Site Enhancer from natural language, for example 'make YouTube less cluttered and hide Shorts'. Dulche MUST present the proposed effect/permissions at the appropriate confirmation boundary rather than silently installing arbitrary persistent scripts. Extensions may provide Site Enhancers through the same permissioned model.
Files, drag/drop and cross-app integration
Browse retains a mature Download entity/lifecycle while completed files integrate with the shared Files system so reveal/open/share/drag workflows use canonical 9to1 file semantics. Interrupted downloads, retries and completion state remain visible and recoverable.
Split panes and tabs SHOULD support semantic drag/drop. Where both surfaces understand a canonical 9to1 entity, transfer the typed entity/link instead of degrading it to copied text. Examples include dragging a Maps place into Planner or a Board item into Write. Web upload targets may receive files through normal browser security/permission rules.
Sites can open project previews in Browse and Browse development context can offer Open project in Sites/Open source in Dev when the page is linked to a local project. Dev can launch localhost/development targets directly into Browse. Mature Firefox developer tools MUST be retained/adapted rather than replaced by a feature-poor custom inspector.
Security and origin isolation
cui://, browse:// and 9to1:// are privileged/non-web namespaces with separate routing and origin/capability rules. Ordinary HTTP(S) pages MUST NOT be able to inspect native app state, call privileged CUI/Browse APIs, forge trusted 9to1:// content or inherit internal permissions simply by navigating to or linking an internal route.
A web page may request navigation to an allowed registered internal route only through the normal navigation/policy boundary. Navigating to 9to1:// does not grant the originating site the destination app's authority. Profile cookies/credentials and engine-private state MUST remain isolated according to their owning profile/backend.
Recovery and degraded states
Browse MUST handle Firefox renderer crashes, Chromium renderer crashes, whole-browser crashes, failed engine startup, unavailable selected engines, extension incompatibility, interrupted downloads, invalid/corrupt engine-private state and failed engine switches without corrupting the other engine or canonical Browse profile state.
Session recovery SHOULD restore tabs, groups, workspaces, split arrangements, ProfileID and per-tab engine preference wherever safe. If a preferred engine is unavailable, Browse MUST surface the degraded state and offer a safe fallback rather than silently losing the tab or rewriting profile data.
Browse acceptance requirements
Firefox donor parity remains present except for explicit 9to1 replacements/exclusions; proprietary Firefox AI surfaces are replaced by Dulche.
Gecko-default and Chromium alternative rendering work within one canonical Browse tab/session model, with engine/profile isolation and per-site engine rules.
Both upstream engine frameworks can update automatically through validated build/test/promotion and rollback pipelines.
cui://, browse://, 9to1:// and HTTP(S) routes resolve to the correct security/content surface, including real native 9to1 app rendering inside tabs.
Profiles can be mixed per tab, per workspace and inside Split View without cross-profile cookie/session leakage.
Tab groups, split tabs and top/bottom/left/right tab-strip placement retain equivalent core functionality.
browse://newtab provides the customisable widget/generative canvas, Search/AI switch and dual-provider split search.
Dulche @ mentions resolve to canonical browser/app entities and permissioned autonomous browsing uses semantic browser capabilities with consequential-action safeguards.
Extension compatibility states, extension CUI surfaces and Site Enhancer permissions behave explicitly and recoverably.
Crash/session recovery preserves canonical Browse state and a failure in one renderer does not corrupt the other renderer/profile state.
Maps
9to1 Maps is the canonical geospatial, place, landmark, routing and navigation service for the 9to1 ecosystem as well as a full user-facing CUI application. Other apps MUST consume Maps entities, APIs and embeddable CUI surfaces rather than independently inventing incompatible place, route or location models.
Primary donor and default provider stack
The primary mature donor is the latest appropriate CoMaps source. The maintained 9to1 Maps fork/adaptation MUST preserve applicable CoMaps mapping, offline-map, POI, favourites, tracks, navigation and route-planning functionality and mature quality-of-life behaviour unless this specification explicitly replaces it. CUI replaces/adapts the donor user interface without reducing the mature capability baseline.
9to1 Maps MUST separate the donor application from provider services behind typed interfaces. The default open stack is:
OpenStreetMap data as the principal open geographic dataset.
MapLibre Native as the default provider-facing/vector-map rendering framework where appropriate.
The retained CoMaps-derived offline map/rendering/search/routing pipeline for mature downloadable/offline operation where it provides capability not equivalently supplied by the online stack.
Pelias as the default self-hostable online geocoding, reverse-geocoding and place-search service.
Valhalla as the default self-hostable routing/navigation service for supported travel modes.
GTFS/GTFS-Realtime-compatible transit data through a typed transit provider; an OpenTripPlanner-compatible implementation may be used where appropriate.
Traffic, satellite, terrain, street-level imagery and specialist datasets as optional provider capabilities rather than hard-coded assumptions.
The implementation MUST NOT make public OpenStreetMap community tile or public Nominatim endpoints an unlimited production dependency. Provider-specific usage, caching, attribution, redistribution and offline-storage rules MUST be enforced. 9to1-hosted/self-hosted services and user-connected providers can be substituted through the same typed provider contracts.
One provider does not need to supply every capability. Rendering, map data, geocoding, search, routing, transit, traffic, imagery and offline datasets MUST be independently replaceable where technically possible. Provider identity, provenance, freshness and required attribution MUST remain available to Maps.
Canonical geospatial entities
Maps MUST define stable canonical entities rather than allowing each app to store copied address strings. At minimum, the typed model must cover Place, Address, Coordinate, Route, RouteLeg, RouteStep, SavedPlace, PersonalLandmark, CommunityPOI, MapView, SearchResult, SearchProvider, MapProviderReference and SavedRoute/CustomJourney or equivalent strongly typed contracts.
A Place may reference one or more provider records, OpenStreetMap objects, community objects or user-authored data without making any single provider identifier the canonical 9to1 identity. Provider records are provenance references, not the primary identity of a saved 9to1 entity.
Planner, Events, Spaces, Boards, Write, Present, Forms, Automations and other apps MUST reference canonical Place/Route/Landmark IDs through typed APIs where a persistent location relationship is required.
Search / AI interaction
Maps MUST use the same explicit Search / AI interaction pattern established elsewhere in 9to1. Search is the default mode. The selected mode is always visible and can be switched immediately without losing the selected place, route or current map context.
Search mode performs deterministic geographic discovery and manual route construction. It must search, as applicable, addresses, postcodes, coordinates, named places, businesses/POIs, categories, saved places, PersonalLandmarks, CommunityPOIs and supported 9to1 entities with attached locations. Provider result confidence and ambiguity MUST remain visible; Maps MUST NOT fabricate an exact address or place identity from weak geocoding.
Selecting a result opens a canonical place/details surface with provenance and relevant actions such as View, Navigate, Add to route, Set as start, Set as destination, Add stop, Save, Share and other capability-appropriate actions.
AI mode is a Dulche-backed natural-language Maps interface operating the same canonical Maps state and APIs. Requests such as 'take me to the nearest Starbucks', 'find somewhere quiet to study within a 15-minute walk', 'find a bench along this route' or 'add a coffee stop halfway home' MUST be resolved through real search/location/routing capabilities rather than invented model knowledge.
A request such as 'take me to the nearest Starbucks' should resolve the permitted current location, search real place providers, rank valid candidates according to the user's request and actual route/travel distance where available, resolve the chosen candidate to a canonical Place, calculate a route and start/present navigation according to the explicit user intent. If multiple interpretations materially affect the result, Maps must present candidates or request the minimum necessary disambiguation rather than guessing.
Search and AI are interoperable. A place found manually can become AI context, and an AI-generated route/place remains a normal canonical Maps object that the user can inspect, edit, reorder, save or share manually.
Saved places and personal landmarks
Users can save ordinary provider/OpenStreetMap places and create PersonalLandmarks anywhere on the map. A PersonalLandmark does not require an existing mapped place, recognised address, road, POI or provider object; a coordinate and user-defined identity are sufficient.
Users MUST be able to drop a pin at any coordinate, name it, optionally categorise it, add notes/metadata, save it privately, share it explicitly and navigate to it. Examples include a meeting point, favourite viewpoint, shortcut entrance, personal picnic spot or a specific bench.
Common saved places such as Home, College, Church or Work are canonical SavedPlace references. Other apps resolve these references through Maps rather than retaining independent copies of the underlying address.
Personal/private landmarks are private by default. Creating a private landmark MUST NOT implicitly publish its coordinates, name, notes or category to the community database or an external provider.
Community POIs and landmark presets
Maps MUST provide a first-class community POI system so users can contribute useful hyperlocal geographic data over time. Users can choose a structured preset when dropping a pin, including extensible categories such as Bench, Bin, Recycling point, Picnic table, Picnic area, Public toilet, Drinking-water point, Bicycle parking, Bicycle repair/pump, EV charger, Bus stop, Crossing, Defibrillator, Viewpoint, Playground, Entrance, Accessible entrance, Steps, Lift, Ramp and Shelter.
Presets represent typed POI categories, not merely icons. A category can expose optional structured attributes appropriate to that object. For example, a Bench may record backrest, armrests, cover, capacity, material, accessibility or condition; a Bin may record waste/recycling type and condition. The common contribution path MUST remain fast: a user can submit a useful POI with minimal required fields and enrich it later.
Users choose explicitly between keeping a landmark private and submitting it publicly. Public submission creates or proposes a CommunityPOI in the 9to1 community geographic database; it is not the same action as contributing to OpenStreetMap.
CommunityPOI records must retain stable identity, coordinate, category, structured attributes, source/provenance, creation/update metadata, verification state, edit history, confidence/quality information and reports/flags as applicable.
The community system MUST support a quality lifecycle such as Submitted/Unverified, Community-confirmed and Verified, together with corrections such as Removed, Wrong location, Wrong category, Duplicate and Details changed. A user can confirm that an existing object is still present without recreating it.
Before creating a public POI, Maps SHOULD perform deterministic nearby duplicate detection using distance, category compatibility and known identifiers. If a likely duplicate exists, the user can confirm/update the existing object or explicitly state that the new object is distinct.
Community POIs are first-class searchable/routable destinations. Users can search for categories such as benches, bins or picnic tables, enable category layers and ask Dulche structured queries such as 'find a walking route with benches along the way'.
Where a community contribution maps cleanly to OpenStreetMap semantics, Maps MAY separately offer an explicit 'Contribute to OpenStreetMap' flow subject to OSM account, licensing, validation and editing rules. Public submission to the 9to1 community database MUST NOT silently publish to OpenStreetMap or another third party.
Routing and route planning
Maps MUST support route planning for driving, walking, cycling and public transport where the active providers/data support those modes, with typed extension points for additional modes. Routes contain structured legs/steps, provider provenance, travel-mode information, timing/freshness where applicable and sufficient geometry for rendering/navigation.
A route can be referenced, embedded, shared and manipulated by other 9to1 apps. A route is not reduced to copied text directions. Alternative routes and provider uncertainty/freshness remain available where supported.
Normal route building in Search mode MUST allow selecting an origin/destination, adding intermediate places, reordering/removing stops and editing route preferences without invoking AI.
Saved custom routes / Custom Journeys
Users MUST be able to build, name, save, edit, duplicate, share and later start reusable custom routes/journeys. A custom route can describe both where the user travels and what the user intends to do along the way; it is richer than a simple list of waypoints.
A SavedRoute/CustomJourney must support ordered typed steps such as TravelStep, StopStep, WaitStep, ActivityStep and ManualInstructionStep or equivalent. Examples include walk to a coordinate, sit on a named bench, wait ten minutes, grab coffee from a selected place, use a shortcut, take a particular entrance, then continue to college.
Each step may include a canonical Place/Landmark/Coordinate reference, transport mode, optional timing or stop duration, notes, routing preferences and required/preferred/optional semantics. These semantics allow dynamic rerouting to adapt ordinary travel segments without silently removing user-authored intent.
Users may create user-defined path segments that are not present in provider routing graphs, for example a campus cut-through, alley, informal footpath or other personally known shortcut. Such segments MUST be visibly marked as user-defined/unverified by provider routing data and MUST NOT be presented as provider-validated infrastructure.
AI mode can create and edit SavedRoutes from natural language, for example: 'Create my Walk to College route: walk to the bench by the river, sit there for ten minutes, grab coffee from Z, take the shortcut behind the library, then turn right to college.' Dulche resolves real referenced entities where possible and must present ambiguity rather than hallucinating a landmark.
During active navigation, non-travel steps such as 'sit on Riverside Bench for 5 minutes' or 'grab coffee' are valid current journey steps. The route can continue after the user marks/completes/skips the step according to the journey model.
Saved custom routes can be shared with other users where permissions allow, preserving route geometry, user-defined instructions, typed stops and shared/community landmark references. Private landmark details must not be leaked merely because a route is shared; sharing semantics must explicitly handle private dependencies.
Navigation to arbitrary/custom destinations
Any canonical Place, PersonalLandmark, CommunityPOI or raw permitted coordinate can be a navigation destination even when no street address exists. Routing SHOULD bring the user to the closest supported route-graph point and then represent the actual final coordinate honestly rather than inventing a road/entrance.
Custom/community destinations must participate in navigation, route sharing, Planner/Event references and Dulche requests just like provider-defined places, while retaining provenance and verification status.
Live information and dynamic routing
Where providers support it, Maps can expose live traffic, incidents, road closures, transit departures/delays and dynamic journey times. Live-looking information MUST retain provider provenance and freshness timestamps/state. Stale data MUST NOT be represented as current.
Saved/custom journeys may be dynamically rerouted around disruptions while preserving required user-authored stops/instructions where feasible. If a required custom/user-defined segment cannot be validated or becomes impractical, Maps must surface the conflict rather than silently deleting that instruction.
Location permissions and privacy
Location data is sensitive. Maps/Home permissions MUST distinguish at least resolving a known PlaceID, searching places, approximate current location, precise current location and background location. Location history, if implemented, requires a separately explicit capability/retention model.
An app does not automatically receive the user's live location merely because it can call Maps APIs. Dulche natural-language requests are subject to the same location permissions; 'near me' and routing requests cannot bypass precise-location controls.
Search history, route history, precise locations, Home/Work-style places, saved routes and private landmarks require user-visible retention/clear controls. Sensitive location history MUST NOT automatically become globally indexed Go content or extension-readable data.
Offline operation
Maps MUST retain mature CoMaps-derived offline capability and support downloadable regions where data/provider licences permit. Offline mode should support map rendering and, where the retained/local datasets allow it, place search/geocoding and routing without requiring a live cloud service.
Downloaded region management must show storage usage, version/freshness and update state. Licence/provider rules govern whether particular imagery/tiles/datasets may be cached or redistributed; unsupported offline caching MUST fail explicitly rather than silently violating provider terms.
CUI embeds and cross-app composition
Maps is both a full app and a CUI surface provider. It MUST expose reusable typed CUI components such as PlaceCard, MapView/MiniMap, LocationPicker, RouteCard and Journey/Navigation surfaces so other 9to1 apps can embed real Maps functionality without cloning it.
Planner/Events can attach canonical Places/Routes; Boards and Spaces can embed interactive Place/Map cards; Write/Present can insert linked map/place/route objects; Forms can use the canonical LocationPicker; Automations can reference place/location conditions subject to permissions.
Maps MUST be available as the real native surface through 9to1://Maps and support typed deep links to canonical place/route/journey objects. It therefore participates naturally in Browse tabs and Split View, for example Maps beside Planner or Write beside a route.
Dulche integration
Dulche accesses Maps through typed semantic capabilities, not map-pixel scraping. Capabilities can include SearchPlaces, ResolvePlace, GetCurrentLocation, BuildRoute, ModifyRoute, SearchCommunityPOIs, CreateLandmark, CreateSavedRoute, AddRouteStep and StartNavigation subject to the appropriate permission/action policy.
Natural-language context such as 'near me', 'near college', 'between here and home', 'along this route', 'around that place' or 'the restaurant I just looked at' must resolve against real permitted Maps state: current location, SavedPlaces, selected Places, active route/journey and recent canonical Maps entities.
Automations and extensions
Maps may expose automation triggers such as arrive at place, leave place, enter/exit radius, material route-duration change or transit disruption where platform/background capabilities and permissions support them. Persistent/background location requires explicit OS/Home permission and MUST NOT be inferred from ordinary foreground Maps access.
Extensions may add providers, overlays, POI categories, route modes, map layers or specialist geospatial tools through typed capability contracts. Providing a layer/provider does not automatically grant precise location, private landmark access or route history.
Safety, provenance and disclaimer
Maps MUST present map and calculated route data as guidance rather than guaranteed ground truth. A displayed road, path, crossing, entrance, restriction, building, POI or route MUST NOT be represented as guaranteed to exist, be accessible, be legal to use or be safe merely because it appears in provider/community data.
The following compact user-facing disclaimer is required in Maps and MUST be available during route/navigation use: 'Map data is sourced by third party providers and community volunteers. Check important routes.'
A fuller safety/data notice may additionally explain that provider/community data can be incomplete, inaccurate or outdated and that users should follow real-world signs, restrictions and conditions. The compact notice does not replace the product's separately reviewed legal terms.
Community/unverified objects must expose verification/provenance state where relevant and MUST NOT be styled in a way that falsely implies the same confidence as independently established/provider-verified data.
Maps acceptance requirements
The latest appropriate CoMaps donor baseline is retained/adapted with CUI without losing mature offline/navigation behaviour except where explicitly replaced.
Open provider interfaces support the agreed default OSM/MapLibre/Pelias/Valhalla stack and allow independent replacement of rendering, search/geocoding, routing, transit, traffic and imagery capabilities.
Place, Route, SavedPlace, PersonalLandmark, CommunityPOI and SavedRoute/CustomJourney have stable canonical identities usable across 9to1 apps.
Search mode supports deterministic place discovery/manual route building; AI mode uses Dulche against the same canonical Maps state and typed capabilities.
Users can drop a pin anywhere, create a private custom landmark, navigate to it, choose structured POI presets and explicitly submit community POIs.
Community POI duplicate detection, provenance, verification/update lifecycle, reports and routable/searchable behaviour are implemented without silently publishing to OpenStreetMap.
Saved custom routes support typed travel/stop/wait/activity/manual steps, required/preferred/optional intent, user-defined shortcut/path segments, AI creation/editing and safe sharing.
Location permissions distinguish approximate/precise/background access and prevent unrelated apps/extensions from inheriting sensitive location data.
Offline maps remain usable where licences/data permit and do not rely on prohibited bulk use of public community endpoints.
9to1://Maps and reusable Maps CUI surfaces integrate with Planner, Events, Boards, Spaces, Write/Present, Forms, Automations, Browse and Dulche.
The required route/data disclaimer and provenance/freshness states are present; Maps never represents provider/community route data as guaranteed real-world truth.
Launcher
9to1 Launcher is the Android/9to1-OS home launcher. It is a maintained fork/adaptation of the latest appropriate Lawnchair source and is a distinct product from Shelf. Launcher MUST NOT be implemented as the cross-platform 9to1 package installer/updater or as the Shelf quick-access library.
Lawnchair donor authority
Lawnchair is the primary donor and mature behavioural baseline for Launcher. Applicable donor functionality and quality-of-life behaviour MUST be retained unless this specification explicitly replaces it. The goal is not merely donor parity: 9to1 Launcher is intended to be substantially more customisable than conventional Android launchers, including mature highly-customisable launchers such as Nova Launcher, while remaining coherent, performant and accessible.
Core launcher surfaces
Launcher owns the Android-style home screen, home pages, app drawer, dock, folders, widgets, app shortcuts, gestures, app discovery and visual organisation of installed applications. It consumes the authoritative installed-application/package registry owned by Home/platform package infrastructure; it does not maintain a competing package database.
Multiple configurable home pages with drag/reorder and persistent layout.
App drawer with configurable organisation, sorting, categories, visibility rules and search.
Configurable dock, including size, rows/columns where supported, presentation and behaviour.
Folders with configurable appearance, layout, ordering and appropriate actions.
Pinned/favourite apps, hidden apps and application shortcuts/actions.
Compatible Android widgets plus 9to1-native CUI widgets through a shared widget abstraction.
Backup/restore of launcher layout and settings, with account/device sync where enabled and compatible.
Full accessibility, keyboard/navigation support and appropriate touch/controller interaction.
Extreme customisation
Launcher MUST expose unusually deep customisation while preserving usable defaults. The architecture must avoid hard-coding one visual layout so additional options can be added without rewriting core launcher state.
Grid dimensions, independent horizontal/vertical spacing, margins, page padding and icon placement behaviour.
Icon size, icon shape/masking, per-app icon overrides, icon packs, labels, label typography and label visibility.
Dock geometry, drawer geometry, folder geometry and home-page-specific layout configuration where supported.
Backgrounds, transparency, blur, theme/accent integration and supported animation/transition behaviour.
Gesture mapping including swipe, double-tap, pinch and other supported gestures, with actions resolved through typed commands rather than hard-coded donor-only behaviour.
Per-page, per-folder and per-component presentation options where doing so remains understandable and performant.
Import/export of launcher configuration and recoverable handling of unsupported/missing configuration after platform or donor updates.
Launcher should offer strong defaults and discoverable presets so extreme customisation does not require every user to configure dozens of controls before the launcher is usable.
Applications and stable identity
Launcher placement MUST reference stable InstalledApplication/Application IDs from the authoritative platform registry rather than raw executable/package paths. Updating an app must not destroy its home-screen placement, folder membership or configured icon unless the application's canonical identity actually changes.
Launcher can represent Android apps, 9to1-native apps and other platform-recognised application targets exposed through the OS compatibility/application registry. Package install, uninstall, update, repair, rollback and channel management remain Home/platform responsibilities. Launcher may surface status/actions such as 'update available' but delegates execution to the authoritative package service.
Widgets
9to1-native apps and extensions can register typed CUI launcher widgets with declared supported sizes, configuration surfaces, update behaviour, data permissions and actions. Compatible Android App Widgets remain supported where the Android platform layer permits them. Launcher MUST present both through a coherent placement/resizing model without pretending they share identical runtime/security semantics.
Dulche integration
Dulche is a first-class Launcher capability rather than an add-on. With user permission it can inspect and modify semantic launcher layout/configuration through typed APIs instead of simulating touch gestures.
Example requests include 'make a page for college', 'put all my games into folders', 'move Maps into the dock', 'make this page denser', 'add my upcoming events widget' or 'make a Development page with Dev, Stack and Terminal'. Dulche MUST operate on canonical launcher entities and honour the same profile, permission and package boundaries as manual actions.
Search and Go integration
Launcher can expose search/application discovery, but universal retrieval/navigation/action logic belongs to Go, which is specified under OS. Launcher search SHOULD consume Go providers/results where appropriate and render them in Launcher context rather than implementing an incompatible second system-wide index.
Profiles and OS boundaries
Launcher MUST respect Android/OS user, work-profile and application-profile boundaries. Profile-specific apps/widgets/shortcuts must retain their owning profile identity and should be visually distinguishable where confusion could cause the user to act under the wrong account or authority.
Launcher acceptance requirements
The latest appropriate Lawnchair donor is forked/adapted and mature donor launcher behaviour is retained unless explicitly replaced.
Launcher is the Android/9to1-OS home launcher only; Shelf remains a separate quick-access product and Home/platform services own package management.
Home pages, app drawer, dock, folders, widgets, gestures, shortcuts, hidden apps, backup/restore and accessibility are production-capable.
Customisation materially exceeds the donor/default Android baseline and supports deep grid, icon, folder, dock, page, theme, animation and gesture configuration without destabilising canonical launcher state.
Dulche can safely manipulate launcher layout through typed semantic APIs.
Application placement survives normal app updates because layout references canonical application identity rather than copied package/executable metadata.
Shelf
Shelf is the cross-platform quick-access library for things the user wants to launch or open frequently. It is a separate product from the Android Launcher. Shelf can organise applications, games, 9to1 surfaces, projects, files, folders, websites and other supported shortcuts into reusable user-defined collections.
Core model
Shelf MUST model launch targets as stable typed LaunchItem entities rather than a grid of copied shortcuts. A LaunchItem can represent, where supported and permitted:
Installed desktop/native applications.
9to1 applications and 9to1:// routes/deep links.
Games detected from supported game/application sources or added manually.
Android applications where the hosting platform supports them.
Executable/application targets with supported arguments and working-directory configuration.
Files and folders.
Web URLs and registered URI schemes.
Dev/Stack projects or other 9to1 canonical resources with a launch/open action.
Explicit user-created shortcuts and other extension-defined launch targets.
Each LaunchItem can retain a stable ID, name, icon/artwork, target type, canonical target/reference, optional launch parameters, tags, collection membership, launch behaviour and supported contextual actions. Shelf MUST preserve the underlying target identity instead of duplicating the actual app/game/file.
Collections and organisation
Collections are first-class many-to-many organisational entities, not filesystem-style one-parent folders. The same LaunchItem may appear in multiple collections without duplication. Examples include Offline Games, FNAF Games, 9to1 Apps, Development, Blender & Unreal, Coursework or any user-created grouping.
Shelf MUST support manual collections, favourites/pins, ordering, tags and smart/dynamic collections where reliable typed criteria exist. Dynamic collections may automatically surface targets such as detected Unreal projects or installed games matching declared offline-capability metadata without converting those results into duplicate LaunchItems.
Collections should support configurable presentation such as list/grid/card density, artwork/icon treatment and ordering while keeping the same canonical contents underneath.
Discovery and target import
Shelf can discover supported locally installed applications, platform-recognised games, 9to1 applications and registered projects through typed providers. Discovery MUST be permission-aware and reversible; detected items do not have to be added to the user's curated Shelf unless the user chooses or a configured smart collection references them.
Users can always add a supported target manually when automatic discovery is unavailable. Missing/uninstalled targets SHOULD remain recoverable as unavailable entries when preserving them is useful, rather than silently deleting the user's organisation.
Search / AI
Shelf uses the shared Search / AI interaction pattern. Search mode performs deterministic lookup across LaunchItems, collections, tags and supported metadata. AI mode uses Dulche to interpret natural-language library requests and operate Shelf's typed APIs.
Examples include 'add all my FNAF games to a FNAF collection', 'find all Unreal projects and put them in Development', 'show games I can play offline', 'where is that game I installed last month?', or 'open everything I use for Refuelled'. Dulche MUST resolve real discovered/canonical targets and MUST NOT invent installed applications or projects.
Launching and actions
Opening an item delegates to the owning platform/application service using the target's canonical semantics. 9to1-native targets use their registered 9to1:// identity/deep-link contracts where applicable. Files/folders use Files/platform open semantics; web targets use Browse/default-browser semantics; applications/games use the appropriate registered launcher/provider.
Shelf may expose typed contextual actions such as Open, Open with, Reveal in Files, Open project, Launch with arguments, Pin, Add/remove collection, Edit metadata or provider-specific actions where the underlying target supports them. Consequential or command-like launch actions remain subject to normal 9to1 permission/risk policy.
Cross-device and missing-target behaviour
Shelf organisation is user state and should be serialisable/synchronisable where enabled. A synced collection may contain a target unavailable on another device. That device MUST represent the item as unavailable/not installed or resolve an appropriate equivalent only through explicit canonical mapping; it must not silently substitute an unrelated app.
Extensions
Extensions may register LaunchItem providers, target types, discovery providers, metadata enrichers, actions and smart-collection predicates subject to permissions. Providing Shelf integration does not grant unrestricted filesystem enumeration, package inventory or private project access.
Shelf acceptance requirements
Shelf remains a distinct cross-platform quick-access product and is never conflated with the Lawnchair-derived Android Launcher.
Apps, games, 9to1 routes, projects, files, folders, URLs and supported shortcuts can be represented as typed stable LaunchItems.
Collections support many-to-many membership so an item can belong to multiple groups without duplication.
Manual and supported smart collections, search, favourites, tags, custom ordering and unavailable-target recovery work consistently.
Dulche can organise, discover and launch real Shelf targets through typed APIs without hallucinating installed content.
Launching delegates to the target's authoritative owner/platform service and respects normal permission/security boundaries.
Frameworks
Dulche
Framework role
Dulche is 9-1’s shared llama.cpp-derived local model framework/runtime. One Home-managed Dulche instance serves every 9-1 app through a broker API; apps must never launch their own competing local model servers. It owns model loading, inference lifecycle, resource limits, cancellation and local capability discovery while preserving upstream provenance.
Voice
Voice is a Dulche capability. Dulche owns the audio-session runtime, speech/model lifecycle, streaming, interruption and integration with requests, tools, permissions and logs. The user-facing controls live in Vision & Voice rather than Home.
Voice API
Dulche.Voice();
Entry point to the Dulche Voice subsystem for the caller’s current context.
Dulche.Voice.StartSession(sessionID?);
Dulche.Voice.StopSession(sessionID);
Dulche.Voice.PauseSession(sessionID);
Dulche.Voice.ResumeSession(sessionID);
Dulche.Voice.Interrupt(sessionID);
Dulche.Voice.SetInputDevice(deviceID, sessionID);
Dulche.Voice.SetOutputDevice(deviceID, sessionID);
Dulche.Voice.SetVoice(voice, sessionID);
Dulche.Voice.SetModel(model, sessionID);
Dulche.Voice.SendAudio(audio, sessionID);
Dulche.Voice.GetState(sessionID);
The documented Voice APIs are authoritative but not exhaustive. Additional APIs required for complete voice functionality may be added following Dulche’s existing API conventions and the global API-parity rule.
Translate
Translate is a first-class Dulche framework capability for multilingual translation, localisation and cross-language interpretation. It is not owned by a standalone Translate app. The primary user-facing product is the built-in Translate Space, while Write, Mail, Boards, Browse, Vision & Voice, AI Overlay, Sites and other authorised surfaces may invoke Dulche Translate directly for contextual translation.
Dulche Translate owns language/locale resolution, translation execution, multi-target Translation Sets, variant identity, glossary/protected-term application, segment alignment, structured-artifact translation contracts, translation job lifecycle, provenance and translation-specific recovery. It MUST use the shared model/provider layer and normal Home/Dulche permission and audit contracts.
Translation Sets and variants
A translation request MAY target one or many languages/locales in a single operation. The canonical result is a TranslationSet with stable TranslationSetID, source reference/revision where applicable, source language/locale, request/instruction metadata, glossary references, model policy, created/modified timestamps and one or more TranslationVariants.
Every TranslationVariant MUST have stable TranslationVariantID, TranslationSetID, target language/locale, status, translated content or canonical output reference, revision, provenance, errors/warnings and segment map where available. Retrying, regenerating, manually editing, applying or publishing one language MUST NOT discard successful sibling variants.
Language identity MUST use canonical language/locale identifiers. When a user supplies an ambiguous or unsupported language label, Dulche Translate MUST request/return a structured resolution requirement rather than silently guessing another language.
Conversational Translate Space rendering
The built-in Translate Space renders translation work as normal conversation rather than a two-box translator. The selected target-language chips sit immediately above the standard Space chatbar; all source/context selection uses the normal Spaces context architecture.
When one conversational request returns multiple TranslationVariants, each language variant MUST appear as its own assistant speech bubble. The language/locale name is displayed directly above that bubble. The bubbles are linked as siblings by the same TranslationSetID/request but remain independently addressable for retry, regenerate, edit, apply, export or agentic follow-up.
A prompt may temporarily target a subset/additional language without necessarily changing the Space's persistent language chips. Explicit requests to add/remove/change the default language set update the Translate Space configuration.
Conversational refinement and agentic actions
Translate MUST support natural follow-up refinement such as 'make the German version less formal', 'keep Action Graph untranslated everywhere', 'add Japanese', 'only redo French', or 'update these because the source changed'. Refinements target the canonical TranslationSet/variant rather than creating unrelated copies unless the user requests a separate result.
Translate Space MAY perform multi-step agentic localisation workflows using normal Space Plugins, Skills, persistent Dulche Agents, Automations and typed app actions. For example, 'translate this page into French, Spanish, German and Italian, then push them to the live site' may resolve the current page semantically, create/update four TranslationVariants, validate each owning artifact/site route and invoke the authorised Sites/WordPress/publishing APIs.
Dulche Translate MUST NOT implement generic hidden publishing or file mutation that bypasses owning apps. Applying translations to Write/Present/Data/Boards/Sites/WordPress/GitHub or other systems uses those systems' canonical typed actions, revision checks, permissions, approvals, audit and idempotency contracts. Partial downstream failure MUST preserve already-successful translations/actions and expose targeted retry.
Structured artifacts and semantic preservation
Dulche Translate MUST translate human-language content while preserving supported non-linguistic structure and identity. For 9to1-native artifacts it should operate through the owning app/shared Productivity Engine using stable object identities rather than flattening the artifact into plain text.
Write translation preserves document structure/styles/tables/images/links/comments and other supported metadata while translating intended text. Present translation preserves slides/layout/theme/text boxes/speaker notes/animations/transitions and detects translated-text overflow instead of silently clipping. Data translation distinguishes human labels/descriptions/comments from formulas, numbers, cell references and identifiers. Boards translation preserves page/block identity and supported embedded artifact references.
Code, commands, URLs, formulas, JSON keys, identifiers, markup/code fences and other structured technical content MUST follow explicit structure-aware rules and MUST NOT be casually translated as prose. The user may explicitly request translation of translatable string literals/comments where the owning format supports safe editing.
Whole-artifact translation SHOULD create a translated derivative/locale variant by default rather than destructively overwrite the source. Explicit in-place commands such as Replace selection with translation use the owning app's normal undo/revision semantics.
Segments, provenance and incremental updates
Where the source supports stable segmentation, Dulche Translate SHOULD preserve segment identity/alignment between source and each target variant. Segment maps enable side-by-side review, targeted retry, terminology correction and incremental updates.
Translated derivatives MUST retain provenance sufficient to identify source artifact/file/entity, source revision, source/target language, TranslationSetID/VariantID, glossary IDs, model policy and translation time. When the source changes, Translate MUST be able to report that a translation is stale.
Where safe segment identity exists, updating a stale translation SHOULD retranslate only changed/affected source segments while preserving unaffected translated content and user edits. Conflicts between manual target edits and changed source content MUST be surfaced rather than silently overwritten.
Glossaries and protected terminology
Dulche Translate MUST support reusable and request-scoped glossaries. Glossary entries MAY define source term, required/preferred target translation by locale, Do Not Translate, notes/context and applicability scope.
Protected terminology MUST support names, trademarks, product names, case names, technical identifiers, commands and other content that should remain unchanged. Glossary/protected-term application MUST be recorded in translation provenance so unexpected terminology can be diagnosed.
Text, image, document and media translation
Dulche Translate MUST support direct text and semantic selection translation. Image/screenshot translation MAY return extracted translated text and, where the selected model/tooling supports it, a translated visual derivative with mapped text regions. Semantic text from a 9to1 surface is preferred over OCR/pixels when available.
PDF handling MUST distinguish text, scanned and mixed PDFs where detectable. Structured text PDFs should preserve layout/structure as far as supported; scanned/mixed PDFs may require vision/OCR-style extraction. Any layout fidelity loss or uncertain extraction MUST be surfaced before export/apply.
Audio translation may produce translated text and, where supported, translated speech. Video translation MAY produce translated transcript/subtitles and advanced dubbed output where supported. Live realtime interpretation is exposed through Vision & Voice → Live Translate while reusing Dulche Translate language/context/glossary functionality.
Model routing and privacy
Dulche Translate uses the shared Universal Model Picker/model-routing system. Ordinary translation requests SHOULD resolve the highest-quality compatible configured route for the requested languages, modality, context size, latency, privacy/locality, entitlement/cost and tool requirements without forcing the user to manually choose a model.
An explicit local-only/private policy MUST NOT silently fall back to cloud translation. Unknown language-pair/provider capability is represented as unavailable/unknown rather than fabricated support.
Translation jobs and recovery
Long or multi-artifact translation MUST use durable TranslationJob state with stable TranslationJobID and statuses such as Preparing, Translating, ReviewAvailable, Applying/Exporting, Completed, Paused, Failed and Cancelled as applicable. Progress MUST derive from real segments/pages/slides/files/variants rather than invented percentages.
Partial failure MUST preserve successful completed segments/variants. A failed page/language/action can be retried independently. Pause/resume/retry MUST not repeat already-completed consequential downstream actions without idempotency/operation identity.
Canonical Dulche Translate API
Dulche.Translate.DetectLanguage(input, options?);
Dulche.Translate.Text(input, targetLanguages, options?);
Dulche.Translate.CreateSet(source, targetLanguages, options?);
Dulche.Translate.GetSet(translationSetID);
Dulche.Translate.AddLanguages(translationSetID, targetLanguages);
Dulche.Translate.RemoveLanguage(translationSetID, targetLanguage);
Dulche.Translate.RefineVariant(translationVariantID, instruction);
Dulche.Translate.RegenerateVariant(translationVariantID, options?);
Dulche.Translate.TranslateArtifact(sourceRef, targetLanguages, options?);
Dulche.Translate.TranslateImage(source, targetLanguages, options?);
Dulche.Translate.TranslateAudio(source, targetLanguages, options?);
Dulche.Translate.CreateJob(config);
Dulche.Translate.GetJob(translationJobID);
Dulche.Translate.PauseJob(translationJobID);
Dulche.Translate.ResumeJob(translationJobID);
Dulche.Translate.CancelJob(translationJobID);
Dulche.Translate.Retry(translationJobID, target?);
Dulche.Translate.Glossary.List();
Dulche.Translate.Glossary.Get(glossaryID);
Dulche.Translate.Glossary.Create(definition);
Dulche.Translate.Glossary.Update(glossaryID, patch, expectedRevision?);
Dulche.Translate.GetSegmentMap(translationVariantID);
Dulche.Translate.CheckSourceRevision(translationSetID);
These are minimum canonical entry points. Applying/publishing translated outputs remains the responsibility of the owning app/Plugin APIs; Dulche Translate returns typed TranslationSet/Variant/artifact references and orchestration metadata rather than bypassing those owners.
Failure behaviour
Dulche Translate MUST return structured failures including LanguageUnsupported, LanguageAmbiguous, LocaleUnsupported, TranslationModelUnavailable, TranslationCapabilityUnavailable, GlossaryUnavailable, SourceUnavailable, SourceRevisionConflict, SegmentAlignmentUnavailable, VariantNotFound, TranslationSetNotFound, TranslationJobNotFound, TranslationJobNotResumable, StructuredFormatUnsupported, LayoutPreservationUnavailable, PartialTranslationFailure, PrivacyPolicyDenied and ProviderUnavailable in addition to normal Dulche/tool/action failures.
Acceptance requirements
Dulche Translate is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
One request can translate into multiple target languages and returns independently addressable TranslationVariants under one TranslationSetID.
Translate Space places language chips immediately above the normal chatbar and uses normal Space context rather than a separate context row.
Each conversational target-language translation renders in its own assistant speech bubble with the language/locale name above it.
Retry/regenerate/edit of one language does not discard successful sibling language variants.
A conversational request can perform authorised downstream actions such as applying/publishing translated variants only through owning typed APIs.
A partial downstream publish/apply failure preserves successful languages and supports targeted retry.
Write/Present/Data/Boards translations preserve supported structure and do not flatten artifacts into plain text.
Formula/code/identifier content is protected from inappropriate prose translation.
Glossaries and Do Not Translate terms apply consistently and remain attributable.
Source revision changes are detected and segment-aware incremental update preserves unaffected/manual target content where safe.
Image/PDF/media translation reports extraction/layout limitations truthfully.
Local-only/privacy policy cannot silently route translation to cloud.
Long/multi-artifact jobs preserve successful progress across pause/failure/retry.
Vision & Voice Live Translate reuses this framework rather than implementing a separate translation engine.
Agents
Agents are a first-class Dulche-wide persistent capability layer, not a standalone 9to1 app. Dulche owns the canonical Agent registry, scope/availability resolution, invocation, runs, queues, delegation, capability resolution, lifecycle and recovery. Agent definitions, durable Agent configuration, memory namespaces and relevant persistent run metadata are stored in Den. 9to1 surfaces discover and expose applicable Agents through Dulche.
AI Studio → Agent Builder is the direct structured authoring/editor surface for this Dulche layer. It creates/edits the canonical Den-backed Agent entity. AI Studio is not the runtime host, and closing AI Studio MUST NOT stop, hide or delete an Agent.
Persistent Dulche Agents are distinct from Dulche Subagents. Agents have stable identity, durable configuration/memory/scope and may exist across many runs. Subagents are transient child-execution units created inside a run for delegation/parallelisation.
Canonical Agent identity and Den persistence
Every Agent MUST have stable AgentID independent of name plus versioned DefinitionRevision. The Den-backed Agent entity MUST retain at least name, icon/avatar, description, instructions, availability bindings, default model policy, Plugins/Connectors, Skills, Knowledge/Files references, Quick Actions, memory policy, capability/permission policy, delegation policy, graph reference where present, sharing metadata, revision history and lifecycle state.
Renaming, moving scope or changing icon MUST NOT create another Agent. Agent display names MAY collide; AgentID remains canonical. An Agent definition revision used by an active/historical run MUST remain attributable even after later edits.
Den MUST separate Agent definition/configuration from secrets and device-specific executable state. Connector credentials remain secure references; local executable paths/caches do not become portable Agent secrets merely because the Agent syncs through Den.
Availability scopes and cascading
Dulche MUST support Agent availability scopes including Global, Surface, Space and Project/Entity or equivalent narrower canonical scope bindings. An Agent MAY have multiple compatible bindings when explicitly configured.
Global Agents cascade automatically into every compatible 9to1 surface. Surface-scoped Agents are available only on their declared surfaces. Space-scoped and Project/Entity-scoped Agents appear when the current invocation context matches those scopes. Availability is composed rather than overridden: a narrower scoped Agent supplements applicable broader Agents.
For a context such as Write inside a Study Space/project, the effective visible set is the compatible union of Global Agents, Write-scoped Agents, current-Space Agents and current Project/Entity Agents, subject to access restrictions. Dulche MUST return origin/scope metadata so CUI can group Agents by Global, current surface and contextual scopes rather than present an unexplained flat list.
Global cascading references the same canonical AgentID everywhere; it MUST NOT create per-app copies. Agent definition updates, memory and run history remain attached to the canonical Agent.
Availability versus permission
Agent availability and Agent effective permission are separate concepts. A visible Agent may still have actions disabled in the current invocation context.
Effective permissions/capabilities MUST be no broader than the intersection of the Agent definition/instance policy, current surface capabilities, current Space policy, current project/entity scope, caller/user/organisation policy and Home permission/trust state. A surface/Space cannot grant a capability explicitly denied by the Agent/security policy, and a Global Agent does not gain universal data access merely because it is visible everywhere.
Agent updates — static and reactive animated icons
Agents MUST support both static image icons and animated avatars. Users MUST be able to choose the presentation for each Agent. The animated-avatar concept is a pet/companion-style icon, using the user's Codex pets/Dots comparison as a design reference, rather than being limited to an unrelated looping image.
Animated avatars MUST react to the Agent's actual activity and relevant conversational events. Required examples include the avatar sitting at a computer and coding while the Agent is coding, and laughing in response to a user joke. Task-state transitions and conversational reactions MUST be configurable and previewable. Reactions are presentation events, not permission grants or claims about hidden reasoning. Animation MUST respect the existing reduced-motion controls and provide a static fallback without losing the Agent's accessible identity or readable activity status.
Agent presentation API and acceptance
The canonical Dulche Agent API MUST cover static/animated avatar selection, referenced asset and definition management, animation-state transitions and event/reaction mappings. Use Den-backed stable identities and versioned configuration shared with AI Studio’s visual builder; presentation changes MUST NOT fork the Agent, alter its permissions or leak private content. Verify saved/reopened configuration, static and animated icons, coding activity, joke/laugh reactions, reduced-motion fallback and readable accessible status, including permission-denied and missing-asset recovery. Connect’s Agent-contact contract supplies email, call and text entry points to these same Agents.
Surface integration and Agent picker
Every compatible interactive 9to1 surface SHOULD expose applicable Dulche Agents through the shared AI/Agent picker or a surface-appropriate invocation UI. Apps query Dulche for context-resolved Agents rather than maintaining private Agent registries.
The invocation context MUST be typed and may include SurfaceID, SpaceID, Project/Entity references, ArtifactID, selected ObjectIDs, current semantic context and available typed actions. Dulche filters this context through permissions before supplying it to the Agent.
Surfaces MAY recommend specialist scoped Agents more prominently than generic Global Agents. Recommendation/order MUST NOT change Agent identity or silently select an Agent with broader permissions.
Scoped surface Agents
First-party apps MAY ship/register useful surface-scoped Dulche Agent definitions/bindings. Once registered, they are canonical Dulche Agents rather than hidden app-local assistants and can be inspected/edited where policy permits.
Write MAY expose specialist writing Agents such as Editor, Proofreader, Long-form Writer or user-created writing Agents. A Write-scoped Agent can receive authorised semantic document/selection/style/comment/reference context and Write typed actions without becoming available on unrelated surfaces.
Vision & Voice MAY expose a Podcast Agent or similar specialist Voice Agents. A Podcast Agent can accept typed inputs such as Topic, optional Sources, target Duration and Style, then use the Voice Monologue mode to research/plan/generate/play a coherent long-form podcast. It remains a canonical Dulche Agent scoped to Vision & Voice, not a hardcoded private voice feature.
Agent invocation interfaces
An Agent definition MAY declare a typed InvocationSchema and optional CUI/Generative UI invocation interface. Surfaces SHOULD render the declared inputs rather than force every Agent through a blank chat box.
Invocation UI definitions MUST bind only to declared Agent inputs and approved typed actions; they MUST NOT grant new permissions. Examples include a Voice Podcast form with Topic/Sources/Duration/Style or a Write rewrite form with Tone, Preserve citations and Scope.
Quick Actions
Quick Actions are named manual entry points into a canonical Agent and cascade wherever that Agent is available, subject to each Quick Action's context requirements/visibility rules. They are not separate Agents.
Every QuickAction MUST have stable QuickActionID, AgentID, label, optional icon/description, predefined instruction or named graph entry point, optional typed InputSchema, context requirements, confirmation policy and ordering metadata.
Quick Actions may be context-sensitive. For example, Rewrite selection should appear only where an editable selection exists; a Podcast Agent may expose Make podcast, Continue latest podcast or Create briefing. Invoking one creates a normal canonical AgentRun with standard permissions, Action Graph, side-effect/idempotency controls and run history.
Quick Actions are distinct from Automations. Quick Actions are manually invoked entry points; Automations own recurring, scheduled, event-triggered and condition-triggered execution. An Automation MAY invoke an Agent/Quick Action through the same Dulche APIs.
Default model resolution
An Agent may define Default Model = Inherit or an explicit Universal Model Picker policy. Inherit resolves from the invocation Space/surface/global policy. An explicit Agent default takes precedence over inherited defaults where allowed, while request-specific overrides may take precedence only if Agent/security policy permits.
Dulche MUST capability-check the effective model against the Agent/run requirements such as tools, vision, audio, context or structured output. It MUST not silently cross local/private to cloud boundaries or substitute an explicitly forbidden fallback.
Plugins, Connectors, Skills and Knowledge
Agent capability bindings reference canonical Dulche Plugins/Connectors/MCP capabilities and Skills by stable identity/version policy. They are not copied into the Agent.
Knowledge/Files references point to Den memory and authorised canonical files/folders/artifacts/providers where possible. The Agent may retrieve current source revisions through owning APIs rather than rely on stale copies. Missing/revoked/incompatible sources or packages MUST be represented explicitly.
Agent memory
Each persistent Agent MUST have an Agent-specific Den memory namespace governed by its memory policy. Durable memory is structured semantic/operational state, not simply an unbounded copy of every conversation/tool result.
Memory writes MUST carry scope/provenance and MUST respect personal/team/shared boundaries. A shared Agent MUST NOT silently copy a participant's private personal Den context, private connected-account data or secrets into shared Agent memory.
Agent memory SHOULD support inspection, conflict handling, deduplication, recency/provenance metadata and removal/disable operations. Secrets encountered in tools/results MUST NOT automatically become durable Agent memory.
Tasks, work queues and runs
A persistent Agent MAY maintain a durable work queue in Dulche. Queue items MUST have stable QueueItemID, AgentID, objective, optional TaskID, priority, creator/trigger provenance, dependencies, status and timestamps. Work may arrive from a user, Space/Task, Automation, another authorised Agent or recovery flow.
A Task is user-level work; an Agent is the persistent worker; AgentRun is a specific execution. The relationship MUST remain explicit: a Task/objective may be assigned to an Agent, which creates one or more AgentRuns. Agents are not themselves a second Task or Automation system.
Each AgentRun MUST have stable AgentRunID, AgentID, DefinitionRevision, objective, trigger/source, optional TaskID/QueueItemID, status, start/end timestamps, effective model/capabilities/permissions, ActionGraphID, outputs, blockers, approvals, usage/budget metadata and recovery/checkpoint state where supported.
Run states and controls
Canonical user-facing Agent/run states MUST distinguish at least Idle, Queued, Running, Waiting, Blocked, Paused, Awaiting Approval, Completed, Failed/Error and Disabled as appropriate. Blocked and Awaiting Approval MUST NOT be conflated.
Run controls MUST support Pause/Resume, safe Stop and explicit Cancel where the runtime permits them. Resume continues the same AgentRunID and MUST NOT repeat already-completed consequential actions. Retry of a failed step/run uses idempotency/operation identity to avoid replaying unrelated successful side effects.
Progress UI MUST show truthful objective/current step/known plan progress. It MUST NOT invent a percentage where the Agent cannot estimate completion meaningfully.
Blockers and approvals
Dulche Agent runs MUST create first-class Blocker records for conditions preventing progress, including category, description, time, whether the Agent can self-resolve, required human action and related entities. Agents SHOULD attempt safe recovery of foreseeable recoverable blockers when their contract allows it instead of immediately escalating every failure.
Human-required blockers and pending consequential actions MUST surface through relevant invoking surfaces and Home Events/Notifications/approval UX. Approval remains a Home permission/action decision; Dulche Agents cannot self-authorise through their own instructions.
Agent-to-Agent delegation
Persistent Agent-to-Agent delegation is a Dulche Agent capability. Delegation MUST retain explicit parent/child AgentRun identities and a typed handoff containing objective, required context references, narrowed capability scope and expected output.
DelegationPolicy MUST be able to constrain allowed persistent Agents/classes, whether Subagents are allowed, maximum concurrency, maximum depth and applicable token/time/cost/tool budgets. A receiving Agent does not automatically inherit all permissions or memory of its parent.
Persistent Agent delegation remains distinct from Dulche Subagents. Subagents are lighter transient child execution primitives inside the runtime; persistent delegated Agents retain their own canonical AgentID, definition and Den memory policy.
Action Graph, outputs and operational visibility
Every AgentRun MUST use the canonical Dulche Action Graph/log/audit pipeline. 9to1 surfaces may render a concise human-readable Activity view and/or the full Action Graph, but they MUST NOT invent a second execution history.
Run outputs MUST be typed references to their canonical owning entities where possible, including Files, documents, Boards, code changes, Planner/Task items, messages, research outputs and other artifacts. Opening an output routes to its owning app/entity rather than copying it into an Agent-only store.
Agent runs, blockers, approvals and outputs may be surfaced contextually in Spaces, Agent Builder Preview, Automations that triggered them, Home Events/Notifications and the invoking app. No standalone Agents app is required or authoritative.
Lifecycle, recovery and budgets
Long-running/background-capable AgentRuns MUST checkpoint enough state to recover or truthfully fail across app closure, Home/Dulche restart, machine restart where supported, provider disconnect or temporary tool failure. Recovery states SHOULD distinguish Reconnecting, Recovering, Recovered and Cannot recover rather than silently restarting from scratch.
Agents MUST support configured runtime/model/tool/delegation budgets such as maximum runtime, spend/tokens, tool calls, concurrent children or delegation depth where the platform can enforce them. Exceeding a budget produces an explicit blocked/failed/approval state rather than uncontrolled continuation.
Canonical Dulche Agent API
Dulche.Agent.List(context?);
Dulche.Agent.Get(agentID);
Dulche.Agent.ResolveFor(context);
Dulche.Agent.Create(definition);
Dulche.Agent.UpdateDraft(agentID, patch, expectedRevision?);
Dulche.Agent.Validate(agentID, revision?);
Dulche.Agent.Activate(agentID, revision);
Dulche.Agent.GetRevision(agentID, revision);
Dulche.Agent.SetAvailability(agentID, availability);
Dulche.Agent.ListQuickActions(agentID, context?);
Dulche.Agent.Invoke(agentID, input, context);
Dulche.Agent.InvokeQuickAction(agentID, quickActionID, input, context);
Dulche.Agent.Queue.List(agentID);
Dulche.Agent.Queue.Enqueue(agentID, workItem);
Dulche.Agent.Queue.Reorder(agentID, queueItemID, position);
Dulche.Agent.Run.Get(agentRunID);
Dulche.Agent.Run.Pause(agentRunID);
Dulche.Agent.Run.Resume(agentRunID);
Dulche.Agent.Run.Stop(agentRunID);
Dulche.Agent.Run.Cancel(agentRunID);
Dulche.Agent.Run.Retry(agentRunID, options?);
Dulche.Agent.Blocker.List(agentID?);
Dulche.Agent.Blocker.Resolve(blockerID, resolution);
Dulche.Agent.Memory.List(agentID);
Dulche.Agent.Memory.Remove(agentID, memoryID);
Dulche.Agent.Delegate(parentRunID, childAgentID, handoff);
Dulche.Agent.Changes.Subscribe(cursor?);
These are minimum canonical entry points. All Agent Builder and 9to1 surface Agent operations MUST resolve through the same Dulche/Den contracts rather than creating app-private Agent stores or runtimes.
Failure behaviour
Dulche Agents MUST return structured failures including AgentNotFound, DefinitionRevisionUnavailable, AgentDisabled, AgentUnavailableInScope, AgentBusy, AgentRunNotFound, RunNotResumable, RunRecoveryFailed, QueueItemNotFound, CapabilityUnavailable, PermissionDenied, ApprovalRequired, BlockerUnresolved, DelegationDenied, DelegationDepthExceeded, ConcurrencyLimitExceeded, BudgetExceeded, ModelUnavailable, ToolUnavailable, MemoryScopeDenied, QuickActionUnavailable, InvalidInvocationContext and RevisionConflict in addition to the global Dulche error contract.
Acceptance requirements
Dulche Agents is implementation-complete only when acceptance coverage verifies at least:
An Agent created in AI Studio Agent Builder is stored as a canonical Den-backed Dulche Agent and remains usable after AI Studio closes.
There is no authoritative standalone Agents app or duplicate Agent database.
Global Agents appear on every compatible 9to1 surface through Dulche scope resolution without being copied.
Surface-, Space- and Project/Entity-scoped Agents appear only in matching contexts while applicable broader Agents remain available.
Agent availability does not grant permissions; effective capability resolution narrows correctly across Agent, surface, Space, caller and Home policy.
Write can expose/use specialist writing Agents with semantic document context, and Vision & Voice can expose/use a Podcast Agent that drives Monologue mode from typed inputs.
Quick Actions cascade with their Agent, obey context visibility/input schemas and create normal AgentRuns rather than duplicate Agents.
Default Model inheritance/explicit override resolves through the Universal Model Picker without violating privacy/fallback restrictions.
Agent memory persists in the correct Den namespace without silently ingesting private/shared-incompatible context or secrets.
Task → Agent → AgentRun and Automation → AgentRun relationships remain explicit.
Agent queues preserve provenance, priorities/dependencies and durable state.
Blocked and Awaiting Approval states remain distinct and recoverable blockers can be handled autonomously where authorised.
Pause/Stop/Resume/Retry do not replay completed consequential actions.
Persistent Agent delegation obeys depth/concurrency/budget limits and does not transfer unrestricted parent permissions.
Persistent Agents and Dulche Subagents remain distinct in API, logs and UI.
AgentRun Action Graph is the canonical execution graph and outputs open canonical owning entities.
Home/Dulche restart can recover supported durable runs or reports Cannot recover truthfully without silently restarting work.
Agent Builder Preview uses the same Dulche semantics while clearly remaining test-scoped.
Agent Builder/other surfaces perform Agent operations through the canonical Dulche Agent API.
Action Graph
Action Graph is a Dulche feature and the user-facing structured view of an AI/agent execution log. It turns the underlying request history into an inspectable graph rather than requiring users to read a raw continuous log.
The graph can show prompts, model calls, thinking/response phases where available, tool calls, AI actions, approvals, dependencies, retries, generated artifacts, failures, hard errors, blockers and timestamps. It is derived from Dulche’s audit/tool/full-log data so the graph and logs describe the same execution rather than separate histories.
Action Graph API
Dulche.ActionGraph(requestID);
Returns the structured Action Graph for a request, including the data needed for CUI/Markdown rendering.
Dulche.ActionGraph.GetNode(requestID, nodeID);
Dulche.ActionGraph.ListEvents(requestID);
Dulche.ActionGraph.RestartFrom(requestID, nodeID);
RestartFrom forks/restarts the prompt or agent run from the selected point while preserving the original history. Earlier completed actions remain auditable; actions after the restart point are re-executed as a new branch and remain subject to current permissions/approval requirements.
Shared rendering
Dulche produces the Action Graph data and the CUI/Markdown representation needed to render it. The shared renderer source lives in Home and is reusable across the ecosystem, so apps do not need separate implementations.
Any app may surface the renderer where useful. For example, Spaces may expose a Show Action Graph button for a response, while Home can expose the same graph from logs or activity history.
Runtime
Purpose
Dulche Runtime provides a simple, consistent API for starting, configuring and controlling model endpoints without requiring each app or harness to manually manage model-server lifecycle.
Endpoint lifecycle
Dulche.Start(port);
Starts a local Dulche endpoint on the specified port. Local Start requires an explicit port; Start(Remote(...)) instead requires an explicit remote target.
Dulche.Test(port);
Checks whether Dulche is reachable on the specified port.
Dulche.Prompt(port);
Sends a prompt/instruction to the specified endpoint.
Dulche.SetModel(model, port);
Sets the model used by the specified endpoint.
Dulche.SetTemperature(temperature, port);
Sets the temperature used by the specified endpoint.
Dulche.Pause(port);
Suspends model activity while keeping the model and its context loaded.
Dulche.Stop(port);
Stops the model and clears the endpoint/port.
Dulche.SetReasoningLevel(level, port);
Sets the endpoint's reasoning level. level may be a named effort such as low or medium, or a percentage. Percentages are mapped across the reasoning levels exposed by that model. For example, if a model exposes five reasoning levels, the 0-100 range is divided across those five levels and the matching level is selected.
Multi-endpoint scope
For endpoint-wide commands other than Start, an omitted/null port targets the active endpoints authorised in the caller's scope. RequestID-based controls are never broadcasts. Return per-endpoint outcomes, retaining partial failures and isolated sessions.
Dulche.Test();
Returns the list of ports currently used by Dulche.
Dulche.Prompt();
Sends the prompt/instruction to all active endpoints.
Dulche.Stop();
Stops all Dulche endpoints.
Endpoint configuration
Endpoints can be created and configured as one unit. Example:
Endpoint Laguna = new Endpoint(port) {
    Model = GetModelByID(laguna-xs);
    Context = 19000;
    Timeout = 300;
    ToolCallsAllowed = All;
    // Other supported model/endpoint properties may also be configured here.
};
Timeout is disabled by default. When set, an endpoint that remains inactive for the specified number of seconds is automatically paused rather than stopped, preserving the loaded model and context.
Capabilities
Dulche natively provides the persistent Agent layer, Subagents/parallelisation, command usage, code execution, local and cloud models, tool calling, MCPs, Plugins, Skills and Generative UI. MCPs, Plugins and Skills are first-class extension types with stable identity, lifecycle, permissions, validation and dedicated APIs; they MUST NOT exist only as ad-hoc wrappers around generic tool calls. Persistent Agents are Den-backed durable Dulche entities, while Subagents are Runtime child-execution primitives. Capabilities can be disabled within scope when they are not permitted or required.
Dulche.SetCapability(UI, false);
Tool registry, semantic capability discovery and feasibility resolution
Dulche MUST expose a canonical request-aware Tool Registry describing the tools, executable capabilities and usable resources that a model can employ to satisfy a request. The registry is broader than a literal list of function names: it includes first-party 9to1 app actions/APIs, Automations actions, Plugins, MCP tools, callable Agents, Skills that contribute executable workflows through authorised dependencies, Files/resource retrieval, image/audio/video generation capabilities, code/shell tools, web/network tools where permitted and other registered Dulche capabilities. Computer Use is represented only when it has been explicitly invoked under the Computer Use contract.
Every registry entry MUST use stable identity and structured metadata. At minimum it exposes ToolID/CapabilityID, source type and owner, version/revision, human-readable name, action IDs, semantic capability/intent tags, supported input/output types, parameter schemas, prerequisites, permission scopes, side-effect/risk classification, platform/scope constraints, availability/health and whether user approval or additional configuration is currently required. Display name and wording of an action MUST NOT be the sole mechanism used to decide what a tool can do.
Dulche MUST derive an EffectiveCapabilitySet for each request from the canonical registry. The effective set is filtered by the active user/profile, current app/Space/project, installed/enabled package state, app/API availability, explicit @ invocations, platform capability, privacy policy, administrator policy, current permissions/trust and any request-specific restrictions. Installed-but-unavailable, available-but-unapproved and immediately executable capabilities MUST remain distinguishable.
The active model/orchestrator MUST be given an inspectable, context-budget-aware representation of the EffectiveCapabilitySet. Dulche MAY provide a compact high-level catalogue initially and expose query/search APIs for deeper inspection so very large tool inventories do not consume the model's entire context. Capability discovery MUST nevertheless remain available throughout the request and MUST refresh when packages, permissions, target apps or connection state materially change.
Tool selection MUST be intent-based rather than exact-name-based. Dulche MUST translate the user's requested outcome into one or more semantic intents and compare those intents against tool capability metadata, schemas and declared examples/aliases. A tool does not need an action whose literal name matches the user's wording when its underlying capability can satisfy the requested effect.
For example, a request such as 'remind me tomorrow at 4 PM' MUST be resolvable to a time-triggered Automations operation even if no action is literally named CreateReminder. The semantic requirement is a durable time-based trigger that produces the requested notification/action. Likewise, 'create an image of ...' MUST resolve to an eligible image-generation capability such as the first-party image app/tool or an installed authorised image-generation Plugin, even if the tool's action is named Generate, Render, Imagine or another equivalent verb.
Capability resolution MUST support composition. If no single tool can fulfil the complete request but a sequence of authorised capabilities can, Dulche MUST be able to construct a typed ResolutionPlan whose steps pass structured outputs/references between tools. For example, a request to 'create an image and put it on the title slide' may resolve to image generation followed by Present insertion; a request to 'find the file and email it' may resolve to Files search followed by a Mail/Plugin send action, subject to normal permissions and approvals.
ResolutionPlan steps MUST identify the selected ToolID/CapabilityID, action, required arguments, expected outputs, dependencies, permission/approval state and why the step satisfies part of the user's intent. Capability resolution is planning, not execution: selecting a feasible tool MUST NOT bypass its normal permission, approval, confirmation, privacy, cost or side-effect rules.
Before a model states or implies that 9to1 cannot perform a requested digital action, it MUST first perform capability feasibility resolution against the current EffectiveCapabilitySet unless the impossibility is already established by a current authoritative hard constraint. The model MUST NOT answer 'I cannot directly create images', 'I cannot create reminders', 'I cannot access files' or equivalent merely because the base model itself lacks that native capability when Dulche exposes an authorised tool path that can perform it.
A capability that exists but is missing a prerequisite MUST be described as blocked/configuration-required rather than impossible. Examples include ApprovalRequired, PermissionDenied, AccountConnectionRequired, MissingRequiredInput, AppUnavailable, ProviderUnavailable, CapabilityDisabledByPolicy and UnsupportedOnCurrentPlatform. When the missing prerequisite can be resolved within the current request and permission bounds, Dulche SHOULD resolve it or ask only for the specific user decision/input required and then continue.
If several feasible tools can perform the same intent, Dulche MUST select according to explicit user invocation/instruction first, then applicable app ownership/canonical-data rules, privacy/locality policy, capability fitness, permissions, reliability and configured user preferences. Cost/latency MAY participate where policy allows. Dulche MUST NOT choose an unrelated or lower-fidelity tool merely because its action name more closely resembles the user's wording.
Explicit @ invocation remains authoritative. An @Plugin, @App, @Agent, @Skill or other invocation narrows or prioritises the capability source according to that invocation's contract. However, ordinary natural-language requests do NOT require the user to know or name the underlying tool. 'Create a presentation', 'set a reminder', 'generate an image' and similar outcome requests MUST be sufficient for Dulche to discover and use the appropriate capability when one is available.
Skills, Agents and Files participate according to their real semantics rather than being falsely treated as identical callable functions. A Skill may contribute instructions/workflow/tool dependencies; an Agent may be invoked as a delegated execution capability; a File/resource may provide required input/context; an App/Plugin/MCP/native action may perform the mutation. The resolver MUST be able to combine these heterogeneous entries into one plan while preserving their distinct identities, permissions and audit records.
Dulche MUST expose canonical discovery operations equivalent to Dulche.Tool.List(context?), Dulche.Tool.Search(intent, context?), Dulche.Tool.Get(toolID), Dulche.Tool.Resolve(intent, context?) and Dulche.Tool.ExplainResolution(resolutionID). Resolve MUST return either one or more ranked feasible ResolutionPlans or a structured no-feasible-path result containing the evaluated hard constraints and missing prerequisites. Search/Resolve MUST use semantic capability metadata in addition to lexical names.
The Runtime MUST cache capability metadata efficiently but MUST version/invalidate the cache when relevant package versions, app capabilities, connection state, permissions, policy or provider health change. A model MUST NOT continue relying on a stale 'tool unavailable' conclusion after the capability registry has materially changed during the request.
A tool-result or retrieved document MUST NOT be able to self-register new authority merely by claiming that another tool exists or should be allowed. Registry membership and permissions come from trusted Dulche/Home registration, package manifests, app capability contracts and current policy. Semantic discovery MUST therefore improve capability use without creating a prompt-injection route to invented tools or escalated permissions.
Failure to resolve a tool path MUST be truthful and inspectable. Dulche MUST distinguish NoMatchingCapability from MatchingCapabilityUnavailable, MissingPrerequisite, PermissionBlocked and PolicyBlocked. When no feasible path exists, the model MAY explain the limitation, but it MUST NOT fabricate a tool or claim to have performed the action. The Resolution attempt and selected/no-selected candidates MUST be visible in FullLog/Action Graph at an appropriate level of detail.
Acceptance coverage MUST verify at minimum that: a reminder request resolves to an Automations time-based workflow without requiring the phrase 'automation'; an image-generation request invokes an eligible image capability rather than returning a false inability statement; a presentation request can resolve to Present from another app; a multi-tool request produces a dependency-ordered ResolutionPlan; explicit @ invocation overrides automatic source choice; permission/configuration blockers are distinguished from true impossibility; Computer Use does not appear unless explicitly invoked; and removal/disablement of the only matching capability causes a structured no-feasible-path result rather than a fabricated success.
Subagents and parallelisation
Terminology and boundary
Subagent is the Dulche Runtime term for a child execution unit created by a request or another Subagent to delegate work and/or execute independent work in parallel. Subagents are execution primitives, not persistent Dulche Agents and not Den-backed Agent definitions. The public API MUST use the names Subagent and Dulche.Subagent for this capability so callers cannot confuse subagent parallelisation with persistent Agents.
A Subagent MAY execute one or more model/tool steps and MAY create nested Subagents within inherited limits. Every Subagent belongs to exactly one RootRequestID and, except for root execution, exactly one parent request or parent Subagent. Detached/orphan Subagents are outside the current contract; child work MUST remain causally attached to its parent tree.
Subagent definition
Subagent Worker = new Subagent {
    ParentRequestID = requestID;
    Prompt = "Perform the delegated work";
    Model = Auto;
    Endpoint = Auto;
    Context = SubagentContext.Inherit;
    Tools = Inherit;
    Permissions = Inherit;
    FailurePolicy = SubagentFailurePolicy.Collect;
    Budget = new SubagentBudget {
        MaxTokens = ...;
        MaxTime = ...;
        MaxSteps = ...;
        MaxToolCalls = ...;
        MaxCost = ...;
    };
    Limits = new SubagentLimits {
        MaxChildren = ...;
        MaxParallelChildren = ...;
        MaxDepth = ...;
    };
};
Constructing a Subagent object MUST NOT execute work. Construction only defines an inspectable configuration object. Execution begins only when submitted through Dulche.Subagent, preventing object construction from causing hidden model/tool/external side effects.
Canonical API
SubagentHandle Handle = Dulche.Subagent.Start(Worker);
SubagentHandle[] Handles = Dulche.Subagent.StartParallel([WorkerA, WorkerB, WorkerC]);
Dulche.Subagent.Get(subagentID);
Dulche.Subagent.GetTree(rootRequestID);
Dulche.Subagent.ListChildren(parentID);
Dulche.Subagent.Wait(subagentID);
Dulche.Subagent.WaitAll(subagentIDs);
Dulche.Subagent.WaitAny(subagentIDs);
Dulche.Subagent.Pause(subagentID);
Dulche.Subagent.Resume(subagentID);
Dulche.Subagent.Stop(subagentID);
Dulche.Subagent.Restart(subagentID);
Dulche.Subagent.Checkpoint(rootRequestID);
Dulche.Subagent.Restore(checkpointID);
Start creates one child and returns its handle after identity/state allocation. StartParallel submits the supplied definitions as sibling children under the same parent and returns one handle per child in input order. StartParallel grants permission for concurrent scheduling; it does not guarantee simultaneous execution when endpoint, provider or resource limits require queueing.
Wait returns that child’s terminal Result. WaitAll returns one terminal outcome per requested child and MUST preserve child identity even when one or more children fail. WaitAny returns when the first requested child reaches a terminal state and identifies that child. Join operations MUST NOT flatten or discard per-child errors, blockers, logs, token usage, model provenance or tool records.
Identity and state
Every Subagent MUST expose SubagentID, ParentSubagentID?, ParentRequestID, RootRequestID, SessionID, EndpointID, Depth, State, CreatedAt, StartedAt?, FinishedAt?, Model and its effective tool/permission/budget configuration. IDs MUST be stable for the lifetime/history of that execution and MUST NOT be derived from display names, array position or queue position.
Subagent State MUST distinguish at least Created, Queued, Running, Waiting, Pausing, Paused, Completed, Failed, Blocked, Cancelled and TimedOut. Waiting means the Subagent is suspended awaiting dependencies/children and MUST NOT retain an execution slot that prevents those dependencies from running.
Scheduling and parallel execution
Ordinary requests on one endpoint remain serial by default as defined by the Runtime queue contract. Subagents do not silently change that rule. A parent waiting on a child that requires the same endpoint MUST yield its execution slot so the child can run; this is mandatory anti-deadlock behaviour.
Sibling Subagents assigned to different eligible endpoints MAY execute concurrently subject to resource, provider and configured concurrency limits. Siblings assigned to the same endpoint execute serially unless that endpoint explicitly advertises concurrent execution and the request enables the supported parallel mode.
Model = Auto and Endpoint = Auto permit the Runtime scheduler to select an eligible model/endpoint using declared capabilities, permission/privacy constraints and resource policy. An explicitly selected Model or Endpoint MUST NOT be silently replaced merely to increase parallelism; inability to satisfy the explicit selection returns a structured scheduling/capability failure.
MaxParallelChildren is a hard upper bound on concurrently Running children beneath the configured parent scope. Children above that limit remain Queued. Runtime-wide endpoint/resource limits MAY further reduce actual concurrency but MUST NOT increase it above the declared limit.
Context inheritance
Context inheritance is explicit. Supported policies are None, Inherit and Selected(...). Inherit snapshots the authorised parent context at spawn time; it does not create unsynchronised mutable shared conversation state. Selected(...) copies only the declared messages/context objects/references. None starts without parent conversational context except identity/control metadata required by Runtime.
A child Result becomes visible to the parent through an explicit join/result path or another explicitly authorised shared data object. Child completion MUST NOT silently rewrite earlier parent messages or a sibling’s context. Multiple children MUST NOT concurrently mutate the same session history without an explicit revision/conflict mechanism.
Permission and tool inheritance
A Subagent MUST NOT acquire more authority than its parent/caller. Effective child authority is the intersection of the caller’s current authority, the parent’s effective authority and the scopes requested for the child. The same narrowing rule applies to tools, filesystem/data scopes, external integrations, network access, credentials and action approvals.
Permissions = Inherit and Tools = Inherit copy only currently effective parent scopes. Expired/revoked grants are not inherited and no new approval is created by spawning a child. An action that requires approval in the parent context still requires approval when attempted by a child. Subagent creation MUST NOT provide privilege escalation or approval bypass.
Hierarchical budgets
Subagent budgets are hierarchical. Descendant consumption contributes to the ancestor/root aggregate for tokens, time, steps, tool calls and cost. A child MAY request stricter limits than its parent; it MUST NOT enlarge any hard parent/root limit. Parent and root budget exhaustion prevents further descendant work from starting and stops or blocks active descendants at safe boundaries according to the relevant resource type.
SubagentBudget MUST support MaxTokens, MaxTime, MaxSteps, MaxToolCalls and MaxCost where those quantities are enforceable. Runtime resource policy MAY additionally constrain CPU, GPU, RAM, VRAM and endpoint occupancy. Provider-unavailable cost/token telemetry MUST use the Runtime’s existing null/Na rules and MUST NOT be treated as zero consumption.
Actual descendant consumption MUST be attributed to both the child and its ancestor aggregates without double-counting the same invocation. If the system reserves budget before dispatch, reservation and settlement MUST be visible separately from actual settled usage.
Depth, child and concurrency limits
SubagentLimits MUST support MaxChildren, MaxParallelChildren and MaxDepth. MaxChildren counts direct children created by the configured execution scope. MaxDepth is measured from the root request, whose depth is 0; its direct Subagents are depth 1. Creating a child that would exceed a hard limit MUST fail before child execution begins.
The Runtime MUST also enforce implementation-wide safety ceilings even when the caller requests larger values. The effective limit is the minimum of caller/request limits, inherited parent limits and Runtime/provider limits. Limit failures return stable structured codes including MaxChildrenExceeded, MaxDepthExceeded and ConcurrencyLimitExceeded.
Failure aggregation and join policy
Parallel sibling execution MUST retain independent terminal outcomes. One child failure MUST NOT erase successful sibling results. The parent/join operation receives a structured collection containing, for every child, SubagentID, terminal State, Result?, Errors?, Blockers?, FinishReason and relevant usage/telemetry.
SubagentFailurePolicy MUST support at least Collect, FailFast, RequireAll and BestEffort. Collect waits for requested children and returns every outcome. FailFast requests cancellation of still-unfinished siblings after the first terminal failure/blocker while retaining already completed results. RequireAll treats any non-successful required child as a failed join. BestEffort permits the parent to continue with successful children while preserving explicit failed/blocked/cancelled outcomes.
Failure policy changes orchestration/join behaviour only; it MUST NOT suppress logs, errors, blockers or completed side effects. External actions already completed by a failed/cancelled child are not automatically rolled back unless the action itself defines rollback semantics.
Cancellation, pause and restart propagation
Stopping a root request MUST stop all unfinished dependent descendants. Stopping a Subagent MUST stop its unfinished descendants but MUST NOT automatically stop its parent or independent siblings; the parent receives the child’s Cancelled outcome and applies its configured failure policy.
Pausing a parent MUST prevent it from dispatching new child work. Running dependent children follow the parent’s explicit pause policy: PauseChildren requests safe-boundary pause, LetChildrenFinish permits already-running children to complete, and StopChildren cancels them. If no policy is supplied, PauseChildren is the default.
Restart creates a new attempt for the targeted Subagent using the specified/current authorised context and preserves the prior attempt in history. Restart MUST NOT replay already completed consequential tool/external actions automatically. Replacement/cancellation of an ancestor MUST invalidate stale descendant approvals and provisional output.
Persistence and recovery of subagent trees
Dulche Den MUST persist the execution-tree metadata required to inspect and recover Subagent work: stable identities, parent/child relationships, request/attempt revisions, effective configuration, states, checkpoints, results, blockers/errors, tool/action records and durable side-effect evidence. Runtime remains the execution authority; Den is the durable record.
Checkpoint(rootRequestID) creates a durable tree checkpoint for all checkpointable active descendants. Restore(checkpointID) reconstructs the tree from the latest compatible durable state. Exact continuation is allowed only when the underlying model/backend/tool supports it; otherwise Restore MUST expose that it is a continuation/restart from checkpoint rather than claiming byte-for-byte execution resumption.
On crash/restart, completed external/tool side effects MUST be reconciled from durable records before any step is retried. A restored tree MUST NOT repeat a non-idempotent completed action merely because the parent process lost volatile state. Uncertain side-effect state becomes a Blocker requiring reconciliation or approval.
Action Graph and telemetry
Action Graph MUST render Subagent execution as an explicit causal tree/graph. Each Subagent is a distinct node/branch linked to its parent and MAY contain model calls, tool calls, approvals, outputs, child Subagents, blockers and errors. Parallel siblings MUST be visually distinguishable as concurrent branches rather than flattened into a fabricated sequential order.
Subagent graph nodes MUST expose at least SubagentID, state, parent/root identity, model/endpoint, start/end/duration, token/usage data, tools/actions, errors/blockers and child count subject to permissions/redaction. Restart-from-here on a Subagent node creates a new attempt/branch under the existing historical tree and MUST NOT rewrite the original branch.
Runtime FullLog MUST retain causal parent IDs and per-execution sequence numbers. Parallel/nested timing MAY overlap; aggregate timing MUST NOT sum overlapping spans as if they were serial. Token/model/tool aggregation MUST use the existing no-double-counting rules for parent and child invocations.
Structured failures
Subagent operations add stable structured failures including SubagentNotFound, MaxChildrenExceeded, MaxDepthExceeded, ConcurrencyLimitExceeded, BudgetExceeded, DependencyFailed, CheckpointUnavailable and RestoreConflict. These follow the Runtime error contract and MUST NOT rely on free-form string parsing.
Acceptance requirements
Subagent support is implementation-complete only when automated/representative acceptance coverage verifies all of the following:
One parent spawning and joining one child with preserved parent/child identity.
StartParallel with multiple siblings on different endpoints demonstrating actual concurrent execution where resources permit.
Same-endpoint child dependency without deadlock and without silently enabling unsupported backend parallelism.
Context None/Inherit/Selected isolation, including no sibling context leakage.
Permission/tool inheritance cannot exceed parent/caller authority and still triggers required approval.
Nested descendants obey MaxDepth, MaxChildren and MaxParallelChildren exactly.
Hierarchical token/time/step/tool/cost budgets stop or block descendants at the correct boundary without double-counting usage.
Collect, FailFast, RequireAll and BestEffort preserve the documented per-child outcomes.
Root/child stop and parent pause propagation follow the documented dependency semantics.
Checkpoint + process restart + Restore reconstructs the tree without replaying a completed non-idempotent side effect.
Action Graph renders parent/child/nested/parallel branches with stable IDs and correct causal relationships.
Telemetry preserves overlapping parallel spans and model/token/tool attribution without parent/child double counting.
Subagent API failures return the documented structured error codes.
Model resolution
Dulche supports three model-resolution paths:
Dulche Den
The user's Den may store models using both a stable ID and a user-facing name. Either can be used for lookup. User-facing names are not required to be unique.
Dulche.Den.GetModelByID(id);
Returns the model matching the supplied ID.
Dulche.Den.ListModelsByName(name);
Returns all Den models matching the supplied user-facing name, including their IDs.
Models.toml
Models.toml contains the models available to the current Dulche configuration and the capabilities/properties associated with them.
Dulche.GetModelByID(id);
Returns the configured model matching the supplied ID.
Dulche.ListModelsByConfig(property);
Returns all configured models matching the supplied property. A property may describe a capability, such as reasoning support, or an identifying property such as an ID.
Local directory
Dulche can resolve a model directly from a local directory, with support for as many compatible model file types as practical.
Dulche.GetModelFromDir(directory);
Where an operation fails because the requested model cannot be resolved, Dulche returns "model not found" rather than throwing an exception.
Model discovery and acquisition
Dulche can discover and obtain models from supported sources including llama.cpp, Ollama and Hugging Face.
Dulche.FindModel(source, id);
Checks whether the requested model exists at the specified source.
Dulche.ListModels(source, property);
Lists models from the specified source that match the supplied property.
Dulche.Pull(source, model);
Pulls a model temporarily. A pulled model survives endpoint suspension, but is discarded when the endpoint is stopped.
Dulche.Install(source, model);
Installs a model persistently.
Model replacement
Dulche.Replace(oldModel, newModel);
Replaces one model with another. When no replacement policy is specified, Dulche applies the safe replacement policy: preserve only metadata explicitly classified as model-independent (for example a user-facing alias), recalculate model-derived capabilities/limits from the replacement artifact, and reset configuration values that are invalid or unsupported by the replacement. Immutable artifact/model identity MUST NOT be copied from the old model.
Dulche.Replace(oldModel, newModel, preserveConfig);
Preserves compatible properties from the old model where possible.
Dulche.Replace(oldModel, newModel, wipe);
Replaces the model without preserving its previous configuration.
safe MAY be specified explicitly as the preservation policy. Under safe, only fields classified by the replacement schema as model-independent/safe-to-carry MAY be preserved; all model-derived or compatibility-sensitive fields MUST be recalculated or reset.
API authority and compatibility
Documented API names, argument order, Result field names and explicit behaviours are binding and must be implemented verbatim. This is not an exhaustive API list: compatible overloads and missing APIs may be added. Resolve unspecified edge cases using the same simple, predictable, inspectable and permission-aware philosophy; do not silently rename or reverse an existing operation. The requirements below extend and clarify the earlier examples.
Requests, sessions and endpoints
Retain port-based calls and add Dulche.Prompt(prompt, port) and Dulche.Prompt(request, endpoint). Request contains input/messages, SessionID, model selection, generation settings, permitted tools, output schema, streaming preference and limits. Input supports text, images, audio and authorised file/document references through capable adapters; other modalities are capability-gated. No private context/file is sent remotely without the required permission.
Dulche.Prompt(port) and Dulche.Prompt() remain shorthand for an explicitly prepared request in the caller's scope. Add Dulche.PreparePrompt(prompt) to prepare caller-local input for those shorthand calls; consume a snapshot at submission and never reuse another caller's input. Without prepared input, return MissingPrompt. Explicit prompt/request overloads avoid hidden state and are preferred in concurrent code.
Assign RequestID immediately, before queueing. SessionID owns conversation/context; EndpointID identifies the logical execution target; port/URL identifies transport. Shared endpoints do not imply shared sessions. Add Dulche.CreateSession(endpoint) and session lookup/reset/close plus scoped context export/restore. Context is the token-window budget, not conversation identity. Overflow returns ContextExceeded unless the caller explicitly permits documented truncation/summarisation.
Endpoint Laguna = Dulche.Start(Remote("https://wherever.com"));
The remote overload connects to an authorised remote target. It does not assume permission to manage the host's entire service. Targets declare provider, base URL, model identity, credential reference, transport/security settings and capabilities. Local Start requires a port; remote Start requires an explicit remote target. Return an endpoint handle with identity, state and structured failure information, never a false Ready state. Cloud targets do not require invented local ports.
Result contract and metric availability
Return Result using the exact field names below. The question mark denotes optional content, not part of the field name. Empty metrics return null. Provider-unavailable metrics return Na, serialised as the exact JSON string "Na" and exposed by typed bindings as an unavailable sentinel. A measured zero remains 0. This applies to all metrics, including those not originally marked optional and nested model metrics.
Use value/null/Na-capable types and separate availability/provenance metadata for pending, disabled/redacted, measured, estimated and provider-unavailable values. Never substitute zero or an invented value for unavailable data. Required identity/status and the Runtime event-log container remain present. Collections with no applicable entries may be null; numeric counts may be a measured zero. A complete aggregate cannot silently ignore unavailable contributions.
Response content and identity
Text: the actual user-facing response, separate from tool arguments and undisclosed provider internals. No text may have been produced for a blocked, cancelled or non-text-only response.
Thinking: the thinking log actually exposed and permitted by the model/provider. Label traces and summaries distinctly; never present a summary as the complete internal thinking or reconstruct undisclosed reasoning. Empty content is null; provider-unavailable thinking is Na.
Tools?: identities of the distinct tools actually used, with links to invocations. Tools offered but not called are not counted as used.
Sources?: sources retrieved, supplied or cited, with provenance and relevant response-span references. Distinguish retrieved evidence from unverified model-generated citations.
GeneratedUI?: structured, versioned UI data, separate from Text and rendered only through an explicit CUI integration.
Models: models actually used, including agent/subtask models, in first-use order and deduplicated by artifact/provider revision. Preserve roles, call counts, endpoints and invocation records. Models[i].Parameters exposes the individual parameter metric.
Also return RequestID, SessionID, Endpoint, Status, FinishReason, request revision and attempt identity. FinishReason distinguishes Completed, Cancelled, Replaced, Blocked, Error, OutputLimit and Refused. Paused is a non-terminal state, not successful completion. Preserve the original provider finish reason separately.
Earlier shorthand fields are compatibility views: Reasoning maps to Thinking; Model identifies the primary responding model; TokenUsage groups the token metrics; Error is the primary error from Errors. ToolCalls contains individual invocations, while Tools is their tool-identity summary. Endpoint identifies the primary request endpoint; additional endpoints remain in Models and logs.
Timing and tokens
TimeElapsed: wall-clock seconds from acceptance to terminal result, including queueing/pauses; live snapshots measure through the snapshot time. Expose queue, pause and execution duration separately.
TimeThinking?: attributable thinking duration. TimeAgentic?: duration of agent/tool work. TimeResponding: duration of generating the actual response. Use backend events or observed spans, not an assumption that all pre-first-token delay is thinking. Parallel and nested spans may overlap, so phase totals need not sum to TimeElapsed; report timing basis and estimate status.
InputTokens: input processed by all included model invocations. OutputTokens: output generated by those invocations, including reported non-visible reasoning/tool output where applicable. TotalTokens equals InputTokens plus OutputTokens when both are known. Preserve provider tokenisation, cached-token details, modality usage and billing data per invocation.
ResponseTokens: output tokens attributable to the user-facing response. AgenticTokens?: output tokens attributed to agent orchestration/tool-call work. ThinkingTokens?: backend/provider-reported thinking tokens. These are labelled subsets of OutputTokens, not extra quantities to add to it. Subsets can overlap, such as thinking within an agent step; retain attribution rather than inventing a mutually exclusive split.
Aggregate actual invocations, including retries, within an explicit request/attempt/task scope. Do not double-count a child invocation through both parent and child totals. If a contributing provider withholds a required metric, the complete aggregate is Na; return a separate known subtotal and coverage when useful. Supported metrics with no value yet are null.
Model parameters, location and storage
Parameters: architectural parameter totals across distinct model revisions actually used, counted once per model rather than once per prompt/instance. This is not a claim that several models behave like one larger model. Report per-model total and active MoE parameter counts separately when known, and label declared architectural active counts versus observed routing.
Location: structured model-weight placement with a readable form such as "9.3% GPU | 90.7% RAM". This is residency, not utilisation. Include device IDs, measurement time/window, quantity basis, sampling method and any other/unknown location. Do not confuse parameter share with byte share, or include KV cache/activations as model weights. Shared/unified memory must not be double-counted.
MoEs expose separate Active and Total placement views. State the denominator: an active-set distribution normalises to the active set; active weights expressed as a share of all parameters must be labelled accordingly. Keep underlying quantities. A display such as "Active: 19.9% GPU | 20.1% RAM; Total: 6% GPU | 94% RAM" needs an explicit basis and remaining share; do not silently normalise or fabricate missing placement. Hidden provider placement is Na.
Storage: disk bytes occupied by response-associated model artifacts, not VRAM/RAM, token usage or cumulative download traffic. Deduplicate shared artifacts within each physical storage location and show local/device/remote breakdowns. Unknown remote storage makes the complete total Na, while a known local subtotal may be shown. Distinguish persistent versus temporary artifacts.
Logs, blockers and errors
AuditLog?: timestamped reads, writes and other actions, with actor, request/attempt, target, permission/approval, start/end, outcome and side effects. ToolLog?: every tool invocation with ID, tool/version, timestamps, safe arguments/results, outcome and correlation IDs. Tools is the summary; ToolLog is the invocation history.
FullLog: the continuous ordered collection of Runtime-observed actions, model calls, available thinking/summary events, tools, queue events, pauses, replacements, retries, approvals, results, blockers and errors. Include UTC timestamps, per-request sequence numbers and causal parent IDs. Do not fabricate exact global ordering for concurrent work. Stream/paginate large logs without losing continuity. Undisclosed provider internals are not promised; sensitive payloads are redacted/permission-filtered with omissions recorded.
Blockers?: structured reasons work cannot complete, with affected scope, evidence, attempted recovery, whether human input is needed, next action and retryability. Errors?: hard model/provider/Runtime/tool failures with stable code, message, component, timestamp, request identity and safe details. A blocker need not be a crash; cancellation need not be a hard error. Keep recoverable retries/warnings in logs.
Use structured results for ModelNotFound, MissingPrompt, EndpointNotFound, PortInUse, InvalidArgument, OutOfMemory, ContextExceeded, ProviderUnavailable, AuthenticationFailed, PermissionDenied, UnsupportedCapability, ToolFailed, RequestNotFound, InvalidState, QueueFull, Conflict and ModelLoadFailed. Preserve "model not found" as the friendly message for resolution failure. Expected operational failures must not depend on string parsing or unhandled exceptions.
Streaming and delivery
Streaming means delivering text pieces and events as they become available rather than waiting for the whole response. It changes delivery, not the intended answer. Add Dulche.PromptStream(prompt, endpoint) and Request.Stream while retaining a path that awaits one completed Result.
The submission handle exposes RequestID, Status, a final-result awaitable and optional event stream. Events include text deltas, permitted thinking/summary deltas, tool/approval events, validated UI changes, metrics and states. Include request/revision/attempt, sequence and timestamp. The final event contains the same Result contract as non-streaming, including final metrics or null/Na.
Never execute partial tool arguments or arbitrary partial markup. Mark provisional output and discard stale deltas after replacement. Reconnect using a cursor or current snapshot without starting another generation or replaying an external action. Use bounded buffering/backpressure with explicit gap/snapshot recovery; no silent audit-event loss. Closing a display stream does not automatically cancel its task.
Response controls and queues
Dulche.StopResponse(requestID);
Stop that response, not the endpoint. Cancel queued work or halt running generation/future tool dispatch at a safe boundary; retain partial output/logs and return Cancelled. Repeated stops are idempotent. Dependent unfinished child work is cancelled, not unrelated requests. A completed external action is not automatically undone.
Dulche.PauseResponse(requestID);
Pause the response, retain its output/context and prevent dispatch of its next steps. Report Pausing until a safe boundary is reached, then Paused. Paused work stays paused until resumed/stopped, not silently completed.
Dulche.ResumeResponse(requestID);
Resume paused work. Use exact continuation only when the backend supports it; otherwise return UnsupportedCapability or an explicitly disclosed, authorised continuation/restart mode. Buffering output while the provider keeps generating is not an exact pause. Never repeat completed tool side effects automatically.
Dulche.StackPrompt(requestID, string newPrompt);
Interrupt the current response with the new prompt at a safe boundary, ahead of ordinary queued work. Preserve interrupted state and return a linked RequestID for the priority prompt. The default stacked interruption resumes the interrupted request afterwards where supported and still applicable; superseded/cancelled work must not be revived. Multiple stacked interruptions use last-in-first-out order and a bounded nesting limit.
Dulche.QueuePrompt(requestID, string newPrompt);
Queue a new prompt after the referenced request in its session without interrupting it; return a new RequestID. Commit session context in order. Failure/cancellation must not silently discard queued input: expose its dependency/state and revalidate its context before starting.
Dulche.ReplacePrompt(requestID, string newPrompt);
Replace the targeted prompt, such as after a message edit. Retain logical RequestID, increment revision and create a new attempt. A queued replacement retains its position; a running replacement supersedes/cancels the old attempt at a safe boundary; a paused replacement stays paused; replacing a completed prompt creates a fresh response attempt from the relevant prior session state. Preserve earlier actions/output in history, invalidate stale deltas/approvals and never automatically undo external actions or replay subsequent turns.
If response A is running on an endpoint, ordinary response B is queued by default, even if its backend permits parallel generation. Other endpoints may work independently within resource limits. Queue order, position, capacity and timeout are observable. Optional parallel mode cannot silently change this serial default. A task waiting for a child on the same endpoint yields its execution slot to the dependency rather than deadlocking its own queue.
Paused work may yield to independent sessions, but dependent work in the same session cannot overtake it. Recheck permissions/context before dispatch. Controls cannot target another user's work without authority. Remote tool cancellation is best-effort when a tool cannot stop; record actual completion/side effects rather than falsely claiming cancellation succeeded.
Lifecycle, configuration and resources
Add endpoint state inspection, explicit Resume, capability discovery and health events. Distinguish Starting, Loading, Ready, Busy, Pausing, Paused, Stopping, Stopped and Failed, plus model Downloading, Installed and verification states. Reachability is not model readiness.
Endpoint Pause retains local weights/context and suspends its work. Stop cancels its queued/running work, unloads owned resources and releases the port without deleting installed artifacts or Den history. Remote operations affect Dulche's own requests/sessions unless remote lifecycle control is supported and authorised. Manual pause requires resume; inactivity pause may auto-resume on new work with an event. Inactivity Timeout is distinct from request, queue, tool and network timeouts.
Snapshot model identity and effective settings per attempt. SetModel, SetTemperature and SetReasoningLevel apply to future work unless safe mid-run reconfiguration is explicitly requested. Validate temperature, output limits, top-p/top-k, seed, stops, penalties and structured schemas against capabilities; silently ignoring an unsupported requested setting is not success.
Reasoning percentages map to ordered supported levels: for n levels use min(n-1, floor(p*n/100)) for p in 0..100; reject out-of-range percentages. With five levels, 0-<20 selects the first, 20-<40 the second, and 80-100 the fifth. Named levels must resolve to advertised support; do not invent a mode.
Home owns the shared 9to1 Dulche broker/service. Multiple managed endpoints do not justify each app spawning competing unmanaged servers. Resource policy covers CPU/GPU selection, offload, RAM/VRAM budgets, active models, scheduling and explicit eviction. Pause does not promise memory release while weights remain loaded; pressure must not silently switch models or discard private context.
Providers, permissions and Generative UI
Provider adapters declare credentials by reference, capabilities, privacy/residency information, rate limits and bounded backoff/retry. Model/provider fallback must be configured and permission-compatible, never silently send local/private context to a cloud. Record actual fallback models and usage. Recover with Den checkpoints; reconcile uncertain non-idempotent actions before retry.
Add Dulche.GetCapabilities(model) and endpoint capability inspection. Separate model ability, adapter/backend support, host integration and granted permissions. A supported modality grants no automatic access to microphone, camera, files, shell or network. ToolCallsAllowed = All means all tools already permitted for that caller/request. Support None, ReadOnly, selected-tool policies, scope overrides, consequential-action approval, sandboxed code and revocation.
GeneratedUI is returned as data. A CUI developer explicitly implements <GenerativeContainer> and advertises supported schemas/components/actions. Without it, retain a usable text/data fallback rather than assume rendering support. Validate components, properties, limits, references and action bindings; model output never becomes trusted executable application code. UI actions use authorised typed tools tied to the request/revision. Invalid generated UI is isolated/logged without crashing the app or losing Text.
Agents/tool loops require bounded step/time/token/cost budgets, visible progress, loop detection, approvals and cancellation. A proposed tool call is not proof of execution. Retrieved content and tool results cannot grant permissions or override the caller's restrictions.
Acquisition, replacement and observability
Preserve Den, Models.toml, local-directory, FindModel, ListModels, Pull, Install and Replace APIs. Adapters resolve supported artifacts/catalogues; a runtime backend is not assumed to be a universal registry. Pin/verify source revisions and expose download progress, cancellation, resumption and required storage. Unsupported formats return errors instead of false compatibility claims.
Temporary Pull ownership is tied to a consuming endpoint/request scope. Stopping releases that ownership; delete bytes only when no other live or persistent owner needs them. Install makes ownership persistent. Replacement stages/verifies the new model, applies preserveConfig/wipe/safe compatibility, records identities and supports rollback without deleting an in-use model. Logical IDs/aliases may survive; immutable artifact identity must reflect the replacement.
Expose runtime/API/schema versions, states, queues, tokens/context, memory/storage, rate-limit status, time to first output, generation throughput and trace IDs through permission-filtered diagnostics. Use Na for unavailable telemetry, null for empty telemetry and labels for estimates. Publish SDK/adapter conformance tests and compatibility negotiation.
Acceptance covers serial A/B queueing, streaming/non-streaming parity, every response control, queued/running/paused/completed replacement, null/Na/zero, withheld provider metrics/thinking, token aggregation, MoE denominators, scoped broadcasts, context isolation, unsupported exact resume, tool retry/cancellation, generated-UI fallback, provider failure, memory pressure and recovery.
Persistent request execution
PersistencePolicy MUST support at least Standard and Persistent. Standard retains the ordinary Runtime finish/timeout/checkpoint behaviour defined elsewhere. Persistent is a durable root-request policy intended for work that should continue until its user-visible completion predicate has been satisfied.
A Persistent request MUST define or derive an inspectable CompletionContract from the user's request, active Skill requirements and target-app acceptance criteria. Completed is valid only when required outputs exist, required validation/verification has run where applicable, required target mutations are confirmed and no required work item remains Pending, Running, Retryable or Blocked. A checkpoint, partial deliverable, progress report or model statement such as 'done' is not itself completion evidence.
Soft request duration limits, provider execution leases and internal scheduling slices MUST NOT terminate a Persistent request merely because a continuation boundary was reached. When continued execution requires a new model invocation, endpoint lease or recovered process, Dulche MUST create a linked attempt under the same RootRequestID, restore the latest safe state/checkpoint and continue. Completed consequential actions MUST be reconciled before retry so persistence does not duplicate side effects.
Persistent requests MUST remain cancellable. Pressing the user-visible Stop control targets the root persistent request, requests safe-boundary cancellation of unfinished dependent work and produces the normal Cancelled result with retained partial output/logs. Persistence MUST NOT reinterpret an explicit user Stop as a transient interruption to auto-resume.
While a Persistent root request is active, ordinary user messages sent through the same compose surface are SteeringMessages belonging to that root request. They are appended durably, ordered by receipt sequence and presented to the orchestrator at the next safe planning boundary without terminating the current turn. They MUST NOT be implemented as ReplacePrompt or StopResponse, and MUST NOT cause already completed actions to replay.
Persistent orchestration MUST maintain a dependency-aware work graph. A structured Blocker marks only the work nodes that depend on it. When a blocker needs user action or permission that the agent cannot obtain itself, Dulche surfaces the blocker and continues every runnable node that does not depend on it. If all remaining nodes are blocked, the root state becomes AwaitingUser; AwaitingUser is non-terminal and keeps recovery/checkpoint state until the user resolves, changes or explicitly stops the task.
Budgets, administrator policy, permission boundaries and hard safety restrictions still apply. Persistence MUST NOT convert a denied action into an allowed action or silently purchase/consume resources beyond configured policy. A limit that can be changed by the user becomes a structured blocker; a hard non-overridable policy restriction remains recorded truthfully and the request continues any unaffected work.
Persistent state MUST survive supported Home/Dulche restarts. Den MUST retain RootRequestID, request revision, CompletionContract, task/dependency state, SteeringMessages, blockers, checkpoints, completed side-effect evidence, active Skill versions and attempt lineage required to resume without fabricating progress or repeating consequential work.
Context compaction and Context Summarisation
Context compaction is a first-class Dulche Runtime capability, not an app-specific prompt trick. Dulche MUST track the effective context budget for every model invocation and MAY initiate automatic compaction before hard exhaustion using model/provider-specific safety margins. Apps and Agents consume the same canonical compacted session state rather than implementing incompatible private compaction.
Compaction MUST preserve semantic obligations required to continue the task: current user instructions and constraints, active permissions/trust decisions, CompletionContract, outstanding tasks and blockers, accepted decisions, stable object/file/artifact IDs, current revisions, completed consequential actions, verification evidence, relevant source provenance and any exact values whose precision is required. Redundant conversational phrasing, duplicated status chatter and obsolete intermediate reasoning MAY be reduced.
Compaction MUST be non-destructive to durable history. The original authorised conversation, tool records and artifacts remain in Den according to retention policy; the compacted context is a derived execution view with provenance back to source message/event ranges. A model MUST NOT be told that omitted content never existed merely because it is outside the active compacted view.
If ordinary compaction cannot create enough safe context without materially losing required information or required media fidelity, Dulche MUST transition to Context Summarisation rather than silently dropping required content or returning ContextExceeded immediately. Typical triggers include a conversation dominated by images/media that cannot be reduced further without unacceptable information loss, unusually dense tool history, or a model whose effective context limit is smaller than the preserved minimum working set.
Context Summarisation is a distinct Dulche job. A summariser model reads the retained conversation/history section by section using bounded windows so the summariser's own context cannot overflow. Each section produces a structured intermediate summary containing obligations, facts, decisions, identifiers, artifacts/references, completed actions, unresolved work/blockers, provenance and continuity notes. Dulche then performs one or more bounded merge passes until a final execution summary fits the target context budget.
Section boundaries MUST be deterministic and provenance-preserving. A merge MUST NOT discard a requirement merely because it appears only once. Conflicting instructions or facts MUST remain represented as a conflict with source references instead of being flattened into an invented resolution. Exact code, identifiers, numeric values, legal/technical constraints or other precision-sensitive content that cannot be safely paraphrased MUST remain as pinned excerpts or stable references rather than approximate prose.
Images, audio, video and other large artifacts SHOULD remain out-of-band as stable artifact references wherever the target model can retrieve them on demand. Context Summarisation MAY summarise authorised derived observations/metadata, but MUST NOT claim that visual or media detail was preserved if the summariser could not inspect it. Required uninspectable media remains a blocker or retained reference, not fabricated text.
A local summariser model MAY be used automatically when an eligible local model is available under the configured routing/policy. Sending conversation content to a cloud summariser requires explicit user permission for cloud Context Summarisation or an existing user setting that clearly grants that permission for the relevant scope. A cloud-capable model in an ordinary fallback route does not by itself grant permission to upload context for summarisation.
If cloud summarisation is required to continue, permission is absent and no eligible local summariser can satisfy the job, Dulche MUST surface ContextSummarisationPermissionRequired/ContextCapacityBlocked as a non-destructive blocker. Persistent requests enter or remain AwaitingUser as necessary rather than losing history or pretending the task completed.
Dulche MUST expose canonical operations equivalent to Dulche.Context.Compact(sessionID, options?), Dulche.Context.Summarise(sessionID, options?) and Dulche.Context.GetState(sessionID). Results MUST report source ranges/revisions, target model/context limit, method, summariser ModelID when used, retained pinned items, omitted/referenced artifacts, token estimates where available and whether the resulting context is sufficient for the next invocation.
Computer Use
Computer Use is a first-class Dulche capability but MUST be opt-in per request. It is enabled only by an explicit @Computer Use invocation token or an equivalent explicit user control that resolves to the same ComputerUseInvocationID. An ordinary natural-language request, an @App mention or failure of a typed app API MUST NOT silently activate Computer Use.
The Computer Use capability may control eligible graphical applications through supported pointer, keyboard, accessibility/automation and visual-interaction primitives. It SHOULD use the fastest reliable state channel available, including accessibility/automation metadata where appropriate, avoid unnecessary human-speed delays, batch safe independent interactions where supported and verify state transitions instead of relying on fixed sleeps. Speed MUST NOT weaken verification or permission gates.
By default, the first attempted interaction with each target application in a Computer Use run requires user approval for that AppID/process identity, and changes to application or operating-system settings require approval before mutation. Home settings MUST allow the user to change this policy to automatic approval for eligible apps and to an Approve All eligible-apps policy. Persisted approval policy remains scoped by user/profile, app identity and the normal Home trust/permission model.
Auto-approve and Approve All MUST NOT bypass hard exclusions, administrator policy, OS security boundaries or other non-overridable safeguards. Computer Use receives no more filesystem, network, credential, settings or app authority than the invoking user/request already possesses.
Generic Computer Use MUST NOT attach to, send input to, automate or manipulate game executables or anti-cheat-protected game surfaces, including games launched or managed through platforms such as Steam or Epic Games Launcher. When classification is uncertain and anti-cheat/game automation risk is plausible, the target is ineligible by default. This exclusion exists independently of user trust level because generic automation can create account/anti-cheat risk.
The game exclusion does not prohibit Dulche Agents from participating in games deliberately configured through the 9to1 Play framework. Play interaction MUST occur through Play's typed GameDefinition/Match/contestant actions and capability isolation, not by using generic Computer Use to drive an external game client.
Every Computer Use run MUST produce an inspectable action stream with target app/window identity, action type, timestamps, relevant pre/post state evidence, approvals, failures and side effects. Sensitive screen regions, credentials and typed secrets MUST follow the normal redaction and permission rules; logs MUST NOT become a second plaintext credential store.
Dulche Autoreview MUST inspect proposed and recent Computer Use actions continuously. It MUST flag patterns including repeated identical or near-identical actions without progress, repeated failing commands, oscillation between states, privilege escalation, bulk/destructive deletion, destructive shell commands such as rm -rf or platform equivalents, security-setting changes, suspicious executable/download flows and other high-risk sequences. High-confidence imminent destructive risk MUST be able to pause the next action for review rather than merely add a passive warning.
Autoreview findings are structured ProblemEvents and MUST feed the shared Problem handling contract. A Computer Use recovery intervention MUST preserve the current request, state and logs and SHOULD redirect to a safer or more direct interaction strategy. It MUST NOT hide that a risky action was proposed or attempted.
Thinking logs, work state and ETA
Thinking-log presentation is a first-class Dulche feature backed by Runtime events. Home MUST expose one global user preference with the modes Precise, Concise, Detailed and Ramble; compatible apps inherit it unless an explicitly supported per-surface override exists. If no preference has been set, Precise is the default.
Precise shows only thinking/work events that materially advance the task, such as a resolved decision, discovered blocker, completed verification step or changed plan. It MUST suppress repetitive self-talk and events that do not change task state.
Concise renders short activity summaries suitable for rapid scanning, for example 'Moving a square', 'Opening Browse', 'Checking the build' or 'Waiting for approval'. These summaries MAY be generated from richer telemetry but MUST remain faithful to the underlying action/state.
Detailed exposes substantially more model/provider-permitted reasoning trace and task rationale, including intermediate decisions and why a strategy changed when that information is actually available and permitted. It MUST still distinguish observed facts, tool results, summaries and model reasoning.
Ramble exposes the maximum provider/model-permitted thinking/work trace available to Dulche, including abandoned approaches, self-corrections and changes of mind when the provider actually supplies those events. Ramble MUST NOT reconstruct, infer or falsely label undisclosed private chain-of-thought as if it had been exposed by the model/provider.
Thinking mode changes presentation only. It MUST NOT change the model's configured reasoning effort, tool permissions, stored audit truth, Action Graph or provider privacy rules. Provider-unavailable thinking remains Na/Unavailable under the existing Result contract.
While active, permitted thinking/work events render inline in chronological position with the conversation rather than in a separate hidden console. The visual treatment MUST be lower-emphasis/ghost-like relative to user/model message text while still meeting accessibility contrast requirements and MUST use non-colour cues so users can distinguish message content from thinking/work content.
When the active thinking/work phase ends, the inline region collapses under a disclosure labelled 'Thought for <duration>' when no tool/action execution occurred, or 'Worked for <duration>' when one or more tools/actions were executed. Duration uses the Runtime's active execution span for that phase rather than queue time. Expanding the disclosure restores the permitted events according to the selected display mode.
After 60 seconds of continuous active execution in one foreground 9to1 turn, Dulche MUST request an ETA from the active orchestrating model through a canonical ETA request. The model returns an estimated completion timestamp plus optional confidence/reason. The UI displays the timestamp in the user's locale/time zone and clearly marks it as an estimate, not a guarantee. Paused/AwaitingUser time does not count as continuous active execution.
Dulche MUST expose an operation equivalent to Dulche.RequestETA(requestID). An ETA response includes RequestID, AttemptID, EstimatedCompletionAt, GeneratedAt and optional Confidence/Reason. If the active model cannot provide a meaningful estimate, the result is explicitly unavailable; Dulche MUST NOT invent a timestamp. Material replanning MAY request an updated ETA and MUST replace rather than stack stale estimates in the primary UI.
Problem detection, autoreview and recovery
Problem handling is a first-class Dulche Runtime capability for detecting, surfacing and recovering from common model/agent failure modes without forcing every app to implement its own ad-hoc watchdog.
The canonical ProblemType set MUST support at least Looping, NoProgress/Stuck, Repetition, HallucinationOrFabrication, OverAgreement/Sycophancy, InstructionDrift, ContradictionWithGroundedState, RepeatedToolFailure, UnsafeActionPattern and Other/UserReported. Additional typed categories MAY be added versionably without collapsing distinct existing meanings.
Loop detection MUST consider semantic and action-level repetition, not only identical text. Examples include repeatedly issuing the same failing command, alternately undoing/reapplying the same mutation, reopening the same surface without new evidence, recreating completed work or repeatedly restating the same answer while the task remains unfinished.
Hallucination/fabrication detection SHOULD use available grounded evidence such as tool results, canonical app state, source provenance, stable object IDs and completion evidence. Dulche MUST flag fabricated claims of completed actions, nonexistent files/entities/tool results or unsupported factual assertions when confidence is sufficient; it MUST NOT treat disagreement with an unverified model statement as proof that the user is wrong.
OverAgreement/Sycophancy detection SHOULD flag responses that materially adopt or endorse a user's factual premise, conclusion or requested assessment without adequate evidence when the task calls for grounded evaluation. Recovery prompts the model to re-evaluate the evidence and user request; it MUST NOT mechanically disagree with the user merely to appear independent.
When automatic detection reaches its configured intervention threshold, Dulche creates a ProblemEvent and injects a clearly identified Runtime recovery directive at the next safe boundary. The directive tells the model what failure pattern was detected, relevant evidence and the required correction, such as stop repeating the command, reassess grounded state, use a different strategy or verify the claimed result. Runtime recovery directives MUST NOT be forged as user-authored messages.
If the detected problem is associated with a proposed consequential or dangerous tool/Computer Use action, Dulche MAY pause dispatch before the action and require re-planning or applicable approval. Lower-risk reasoning-quality problems SHOULD normally correct the active request without cancelling the turn or discarding valid completed work.
Every conversational 9to1 AI surface MUST expose a small Problem pill above/adjacent to the compose bar. The user can invoke it even when automatic detection did not fire, select a ProblemType and optionally add a note. Manual reports enter the same ProblemEvent/recovery pipeline and are delivered to the active request at a safe boundary without implicitly stopping the request.
ProblemEvents MUST record stable ProblemEventID, RequestID/AttemptID, category, detector source (automatic, autoreview or user), timestamp, safe evidence references, confidence when machine-detected, intervention taken, affected action/node and resolution outcome. They MUST appear in FullLog/Action Graph with sensitive content redacted as required.
Problem detection MUST itself be bounded and loop-safe. A false-positive recovery that does not improve state MUST NOT trigger an endless reviewer/model ping-pong. Repeated unresolved problems should escalate to a visible blocker, alternate model/strategy where permitted, or user decision while preserving completed work.
Dulche Den
Purpose
Dulche Den is Dulche's persistent, cross-harness storage standard. It allows Dulche state to remain available across compatible apps and harnesses rather than being tied to one running endpoint or one application session.
Model catalogue
A user's Den can maintain their model catalogue using stable model IDs alongside user-facing names. IDs provide unambiguous model references; names are intended for human-facing use and may be duplicated, which is why name lookup returns a list rather than assuming a single match.
Cross-app state
Den is also intended to provide persistent storage for cross-app context, agents and related Dulche state so compatible 9to1 surfaces can share the same underlying information instead of maintaining isolated copies.
Storage structure and portability
Den is a directory-based persistent store with a versioned den.json manifest, structured records, a transaction journal and separately stored or referenced large objects. Portable records use UTF-8 JSON; local databases and indexes may accelerate access but must not be the only readable copy or create an incompatible private format. Exports contain authorised records and explicitly selected attachments. Reference model weights and external Files documents by identity/content hash rather than copying them by default. No special bundle extension is mandated.
The manifest identifies DenID, FormatVersion, SchemaVersion, minimum reader/writer versions, namespaces, storage locations and required capabilities. Validate manifests, paths, sizes and hashes before import. Importing never executes code or automatically enables agents, tools, connections or permissions.
Identity, namespaces and model records
Every model, agent, conversation, context object, workflow and request has a stable ID independent of name/path. Separate personal, team, organisation and app namespaces; device paths and hardware settings stay device-local. Shared namespaces are opt-in.
Model records contain logical ID, display name, aliases, provider/source, immutable revision/artifact hash, family, format, quantisation, modalities/capabilities, context/output limits, ordered reasoning levels, configuration overrides, installation references, timestamps, provenance and replacement history. Parameters, active MoE parameters, storage and hardware metrics use Runtime's availability rules. Local paths are not portable identities.
ID lookup is unambiguous in its namespace. Name/property lookup returns all matches, never silently chooses a duplicate. Aliases are explicit namespace-scoped references. Model replacement may retain logical ID/name but records changed artifact/provider identity, retained/reset settings and rollback history.
Sessions, context and checkpoints
Den persists messages/revisions, authorised context, agent definitions, requests/results, tool records, approvals and checkpoints as distinct record types. Runtime executes work; Den stores information needed to inspect or resume it.
Portability covers supported messages, context, configuration, definitions and history, not arbitrary backend caches, GPU state or undisclosed internal model state. Checkpoints declare backend/model compatibility. Distinguish a continuation attempt from exact resumption and never automatically repeat completed external actions.
Context records identify source, owning app, timestamps, author/inference provenance, access scope and retention. Distinguish user-authored, imported and inferred context. Sharing a conversation does not automatically share its referenced sources, secrets, attachments or private inferences.
Persistent Memory
Persistent Memory is a core Dulche Den subsystem for durable cross-session information about the user, recurring entities, preferences, decisions, projects and other scoped context that Dulche should be able to retrieve in future conversations or authorised surfaces. It is separate from Background Learning.
Memory is not one opaque prompt file. A persistent MemoryEntry should carry stable identity, content or structured value, subject/entity, memory type/category, scope, source/provenance, confidence where applicable, created/updated state, supersession/correction relationships, retention state and user-edited/locked state where supported.
Scopes
Memory can be scoped so unrelated Agents/apps do not receive unnecessary context. Supported scopes should include global/user memory plus narrower project, Agent, app/surface or other explicit contexts where appropriate. Retrieval MUST respect both scope and permission.
Creation and retrieval
Dulche may create or update memories from eligible conversations/context according to the user's Memory Frequency and memory policy. Retrieval is relevance-based: only memories useful to the active request/context should be injected, rather than the complete memory store.
Explicit user corrections supersede contradictory earlier memories. Den MUST retain enough provenance/revision information to distinguish an explicit user statement from an inference and to avoid repeatedly resurfacing a memory that has been corrected, superseded or deleted.
Memory Frequency
Settings MUST expose a Memory Frequency preference with exactly four user-facing levels: Never, Sometimes, Often and Always. The selected level controls how readily Dulche autonomously creates, reinforces or updates Persistent Memory from eligible non-temporary interactions.
Never: Dulche MUST NOT autonomously create, reinforce or update Persistent Memory from ordinary interactions. Direct user-invoked memory-management actions are separate explicit operations.
Sometimes: use a conservative threshold and retain only clearly durable, repeatedly useful or high-value information.
Often: use a lower threshold and remember useful preferences, decisions, entities and ongoing context more readily when they are likely to help future responses.
Always: evaluate every eligible interaction for durable memory and normally retain information that satisfies the memory policy, while still deduplicating noise, respecting scope/retention rules and avoiding ineligible information.
Changing Memory Frequency affects future autonomous memory behaviour; it MUST NOT silently delete existing memories. The setting is independent of Background Learning.
Temporary chats in Spaces
Spaces can provide Temporary Chats. Persistent Memory creation is disabled inside a Temporary Chat regardless of the user's Memory Frequency. While a chat is temporary, Dulche MUST NOT autonomously create, update, reinforce, merge or promote Persistent Memory from that conversation.
Any explicit action that would save new Persistent Memory from a Temporary Chat must be unavailable or clearly report that memory creation is disabled for temporary chats. Temporary-chat memory-write suppression MUST NOT be bypassed by an Agent, plugin, Skill, tool or Background Learning pipeline.
This rule governs memory creation/writes. Whether existing authorised memories are retrieved into a temporary chat is a separate context/privacy policy and MUST NOT be inferred from the memory-write prohibition.
Management and lifecycle
Users must be able to inspect, search, edit/correct, supersede and delete persistent memories through the appropriate settings/Den surfaces. Deletion and retention use Den's normal lifecycle, sync and purge contracts. Memory export/import must preserve scopes, provenance and deletion/supersession semantics rather than flattening entries into plain prose.
Persistent Memory acceptance requirements
Persistent Memory exists as a distinct Den record system and is not substituted by Background Learning, session context or Agent-only memory.
Memory retrieval is relevance-, scope- and permission-aware.
Never/Sometimes/Often/Always control autonomous memory creation/reinforcement with the semantics above.
Temporary Chats in Spaces cannot create, update or reinforce Persistent Memory regardless of frequency or calling surface.
Corrections/supersession are durable and user-manageable, and explicit user statements remain distinguishable from inference.
Permissions and secrets
Authorise access per principal, namespace and object/action. Reading context, modifying an agent, executing tools and administering Den are separate permissions enforced below the UI. Revocation applies to future reads/searches/executions; it does not erase copies already disclosed.
Store credential references, not plaintext API keys, passwords, private keys or tokens in records, exports or logs. Resolve references through secure credential storage on the relevant device/service. Protect sensitive storage and transport, document key ownership/recovery and redact sensitive log payloads without falsifying whether an action occurred.
Concurrent writes and recovery
Use atomic transactions or crash-safe journalled updates. Mutable objects have revisions; updates supply expected revisions and return Conflict instead of overwriting newer data. Support concurrent readers and coordinated writes with bounded locking. Operation IDs make safely retryable writes idempotent.
Validate before commit, preserve the previous valid record until commit and recover/quarantine incomplete writes after crashes. Export consistent snapshots. Caches and indexes are rebuildable, not the sole authority.
Synchronisation and conflicts
Cross-device/team sync is optional and namespace-scoped. Track IDs, revisions, origin device and deletion tombstones. Offline changes wait for an authorised sync target. Merge compatible disjoint edits; preserve conflicting versions for review. Wall-clock timestamps alone never choose the winner.
Concurrent conversation edits create explicit revisions or alternate continuations. Sync does not execute stored requests or replay tools. Device-local paths, secrets and hardware settings are not portable values. Recheck permissions on reconnection and record deletion/restoration/revocation explicitly.
Lifecycle and storage policy
Support create/open, inspect/search/update, export/import, backup/restore, soft-delete and explicit permanent purge. Retention is configurable and visible by namespace/category; do not assume indefinite retention or silently discard work under storage pressure. Soft-delete preserves recoverable revisions until expiry. Purge covers managed replicas/indexes/derived records under policy, with explicit limits for offline copies and external backups.
Large files use content-addressed blobs or authorised external references. Reference counting prevents deletion while another owner needs an artifact. Distinguish quotas for metadata, logs, caches, attachments and model weights. Den metadata does not make a temporary Pull permanent: Install or an explicit pin creates persistent ownership.
Compatibility and migration
Publish versioned schemas, examples and conformance tests. Compatible writers preserve unknown optional fields; unknown security-critical fields or required capabilities block unsafe writes. Validate, back up and transactionally migrate schemas. Unsupported newer versions may open read-only when safe, never discard fields to force a downgrade.
Round-trip null for empty metrics and Na for provider-unavailable metrics, serialised as "Na"; measured zero stays 0. Permission-filter search/index results and include revision/provenance.
Supporting APIs and acceptance
Preserve Dulche.Den.GetModelByID(id) and Dulche.Den.ListModelsByName(name). Add compatible create/open, scoped search, revision-checked update, export/import, sync, restore and purge APIs with documented signatures and failures.
Acceptance covers cross-harness round-tripping, duplicate names, concurrent edits, offline conflicts, crash recovery, revocation, safe import, secret-free export, model replacement/rollback, retention/restore and migrations without data loss.
Generative UI
Generative UI is a Dulche capability that allows a model or Agent to return arbitrary structured user interfaces when an interface is more useful than prose. Generated interfaces may be visual, interactive and stateful, but MUST be expressed through a validated declarative Generative UI schema and MUST NOT execute arbitrary model-generated application code.
Rendering and trust boundary
CUI is the rendering layer for Generative UI. Generated surfaces render inside a CUI <GenerativeContainer> or equivalent trusted host component using approved CUI primitives, design tokens, theming, layout, accessibility and interaction behaviour. Any authorised 9to1 app may host a GenerativeContainer without implementing its own incompatible renderer.
Dulche may choose the structure and composition of the interface, including novel layouts, but the model output is data/schema rather than executable JavaScript, Python, shell commands, native binaries or arbitrary application code. The Generative UI runtime validates schema version, component types, properties, state bindings, declared actions and capability references before rendering.
Templates
Generative UI provides reusable high-level templates for common interaction patterns. Templates are starting structures, not hard limits; Dulche can instantiate, extend, combine or restyle them through supported schema properties.
Flashcard set / study deck.
Table, sortable/filterable data table and comparison grid.
Quiz, practice exercise and answer/reveal workflow.
Timeline and step-by-step guide.
Checklist and progress tracker.
Card grid / gallery / result browser.
Form, questionnaire and multi-step wizard.
Kanban/task-board style layout where appropriate.
Glossary / FAQ / concept-reference layout.
Diagram, relationship map and structured visual explainer.
Other shared templates added by the Generative UI framework or authorised extensions.
Primitive composition
When no template fully fits the task, Dulche can compose a custom surface from approved lower-level primitives. The supported primitive set should include, where appropriate, text/heading blocks, icons or generated illustrations, cards, badges/tags, buttons, inputs, dropdowns, toggles, sliders, chips, lists, tables, grids, tabs, accordions, progress indicators, layout containers, drag containers, drop zones, connectors/relationships, semantic-object views and other safe CUI primitives.
The primitive library is extensible through versioned framework/extension contracts. Unsupported component types MUST be rejected or downgraded safely; a model cannot create a new privileged executable component merely by naming it in the schema.
State and interaction
Generated surfaces may maintain bounded typed state. Supported interactions can include selecting options, sorting/filtering, expanding/collapsing content, progressing through steps, editing fields, revealing hints/answers, checking responses, reordering items, dragging supported objects between declared drop zones, switching views and updating selected data.
State mutations are handled by the Generative UI runtime or by declared typed actions. Interaction support does not grant the model arbitrary code execution or unrestricted access to the host application's process.
Progressive conversational evolution
A generated surface is a first-class conversation artifact and may evolve across turns. Dulche should be able to patch or transform an existing surface instead of rebuilding unrelated output from scratch. Examples include turning a static explanation into an interactive exercise, adding another column to a table, converting notes into flashcards, adding filters, changing a card grid into a comparison view or preserving quiz progress while adding new questions.
Updates must address stable SurfaceID/component/state identities or equivalent schema identities so user interaction state is retained wherever the requested transformation allows it. Partial regeneration is preferred when only part of a surface changes.
Typed actions and side effects
Generated controls bind to declared typed actions rather than arbitrary executable handlers. An action definition includes stable identity, expected input schema, allowed state mutation or API binding, required capability/permission and result/error contract.
Pure presentation and local interaction may execute inside the Generative UI runtime without external side effects. Actions that invoke 9to1 APIs, tools or external services remain subject to the same permission, confirmation, auditing and consequence rules as the underlying capability. Generative UI MUST NOT be a path around security prompts or tool permissions.
Data binding and semantic objects
Generative UI can bind to authorised structured data and canonical 9to1 entities instead of flattening everything into prompt text. Examples include Data ranges, Planner tasks, Maps Places/Routes, Board items, Write selections/documents, search results, translation sets, code diffs or Dulche Action Graph state.
Bindings retain source identity and permissions. A rendered card or table row that represents a canonical object should reference that object rather than silently creating a disconnected copy unless the user explicitly asks for a snapshot.
Ephemeral and saved artifacts
A generated surface may remain ephemeral to the current response/session or be promoted through an explicit supported conversion/save path. Examples include saving generated flashcards as a study resource, converting a generated task board into a Board, inserting a generated table into Write/Data or saving a generated route through Maps. Promotion uses the destination app's canonical API and permissions.
Third-party visual examples and assets
Generative UI may reproduce the functional idea or spatial structure needed to explain a third-party product/game without copying proprietary artwork merely to imitate the source. Where licensed/authorised assets are not available, it should use generic, stylised, text-labelled or newly generated representations sufficient to communicate the concept.
Example: if the user asks how an item is crafted in Minecraft, Dulche may create a visual 3x3 crafting-grid representation using generic/stylised ingredient tokens and an output slot rather than copied official item textures or proprietary interface artwork. In later turns the same surface may be made interactive using approved drag/drop primitives so the user can move ingredient tokens, receive validation, request hints or turn the recipe into a quiz.
Accessibility and visual consistency
Generated UI MUST inherit the host CUI theme/design system and remain accessible. The runtime should enforce semantic roles, labels, focusability/order, keyboard operation, screen-reader information, non-colour-only meaning and accessible alternatives for interactions such as drag/drop wherever the component library supports them.
Failure and fallback
Invalid, unsupported or unsafe generated schemas MUST fail closed without executing arbitrary content. Dulche may repair/regenerate the affected surface or fall back to a non-interactive/native representation while preserving the user-visible answer where possible.
Result contract and acceptance
Result.GeneratedUI contains the generated UI payload when present and returns null when no generated interface is produced. The payload must identify schema version, surface identity, component tree, declared state/bindings and declared actions/capabilities required to reproduce the surface safely.
Dulche can create arbitrary useful UI structures without arbitrary code execution.
Built-in templates and lower-level CUI primitives can be combined and extended within the declarative schema.
Generated surfaces support safe stateful interaction and can evolve across conversation turns without unnecessarily discarding user state.
All external side effects route through typed permission-aware actions.
Structured 9to1 data can be bound by canonical identity, and generated artifacts can be promoted through destination-app APIs.
Generated UI follows CUI theming/accessibility and safely handles invalid schemas or unavailable components.
Background Learning
Background Learning is an explicitly opt-in Dulche personalisation subsystem. It is separate from Persistent Memory. Enabling Background Learning allows Dulche to learn useful patterns, interests and reusable knowledge from eligible 9to1 activity over time; it does not itself enable or disable Persistent Memory and it does not imply continuous fine-tuning of the underlying base model.
Eligible learning classes
Background Learning can maintain three broad classes of learned information:
9to1 usage and project context: which authorised surfaces the user uses most, recurring workflows, recently or frequently active projects, apps commonly used together, important project terminology/entities and other usage patterns that improve contextual relevance.
Interests and topic Knowledge Banks: recurring subjects the user appears to care about, together with reusable factual/reference material that can improve later answers and remain available offline. For example, repeated questions about cars may lead to an Interest record for cars and a local Cars Knowledge Bank containing useful terminology, concepts and sourced reference material.
Other relevant personalisation information: additional permitted information that materially improves responses, such as preferred terminology, recurring goals, explanation preferences, established project conventions, frequently used tools, entity relationships and corrections that should influence future response behaviour.
Usage and project learning
The usage-learning layer SHOULD retain useful semantic state rather than an indiscriminate permanent clickstream. For example, it may learn that Dev and Stack are frequently used for a particular project or that a project is currently active. Raw activity used to derive these signals should be retained only to the extent required by the configured retention/privacy model.
Learned project context can help Dulche resolve ambiguous references, rank context candidates, suggest likely relevant surfaces and prepare authorised Agents with useful project context. It MUST remain scope-aware: project-specific learning does not automatically become unrelated global context.
Interest Knowledge Banks
Background Learning can create and maintain topic-specific KnowledgeBank entities. A KnowledgeBank can contain a stable ID, topic/title, entries, source/provenance metadata, confidence, freshness, creation/update state, storage/sync policy and enabled/disabled state. Knowledge Banks may be created automatically from recurring interests or explicitly managed by the user.
Knowledge Bank entries may include reusable summaries, terminology, relationships, reference facts and other material previously obtained from authorised local sources, user interactions or trusted retrieval. Factual entries MUST retain enough provenance/freshness information for Dulche to distinguish durable knowledge from information that may need refreshing.
Knowledge Banks are not the same as Persistent Memory. For example, 'the user is interested in cars' is personalisation/user context; a structured offline bank explaining engines, EV charging and vehicle terminology is subject knowledge. Dulche may use both when relevant, but they remain separately inspectable and manageable.
Structured learned state
Background Learning MUST store structured learned records rather than relying on one opaque free-form profile. Records should carry stable identity, category/type, subject/entity, learned value, provenance, confidence, creation/update state, last reinforcement/use where useful, freshness/expiry semantics and user-edited/locked state where applicable.
Explicit user corrections outrank contradictory inferred learning. If a user corrects an inferred preference, project status or interest, the system MUST revise/supersede the stale inference instead of allowing both to compete indefinitely as equally valid facts.
Selective retrieval
The complete learning store MUST NOT be injected into every request. Dulche must retrieve only learning context relevant to the active request, Agent, app and permission scope. Retrieval should use current entities/topics/project context to select the smallest useful set of records and Knowledge Bank material.
Privacy and cloud boundaries
Background Learning data is private by default and exists to personalise the user's 9to1 AI experience. It MUST NOT be sold, used to build advertising profiles or indiscriminately uploaded to third parties. Enabling Background Learning does not itself grant permission to transmit learned information to a cloud model/provider.
If a Dulche request uses a remote/cloud provider, disclosure of any learned context remains subject to the normal provider, privacy, permission and data-minimisation rules for that request. The implementation MUST distinguish permission to learn/store information from permission to disclose that information externally.
Any optional cross-device synchronisation of Background Learning state must be user-controlled and protected by the applicable authenticated/encrypted 9to1 sync/storage architecture. The feature MUST remain useful locally and must not require insecure cloud upload merely to personalise responses.
User controls
Users must be able to enable/disable Background Learning, pause new learning, inspect learned information, inspect and manage topic Knowledge Banks, correct inaccurate learning, delete individual learned records or a complete topic bank, clear learned categories and configure which apps/projects/categories may contribute where supported. Disabling learning stops creation/reinforcement of new learned state but MUST NOT silently delete existing Persistent Memory or unrelated user data.
Relationship to Persistent Memory
Persistent Memory and Background Learning are independent. Persistent Memory stores durable cross-session memories under the Memory policy; Background Learning is the opt-in process that derives usage patterns, interests, Knowledge Banks and other personalisation state. Neither feature may silently enable, disable, clear or substitute for the other.
Background Learning may identify information that would be useful as a durable memory, but any conversion into Persistent Memory must use the Memory subsystem and preserve that the source was an inference rather than an explicit user statement. Explicit Memory corrections remain authoritative over contradictory Background Learning inferences.
Background Learning acceptance requirements
Background Learning is off until the user opts in and remains independently configurable from Persistent Memory.
Eligible 9to1 usage/project patterns, interests/Knowledge Banks and other useful personalisation information can be learned as structured, inspectable state.
Topic Knowledge Banks can provide relevant offline reference material and retain provenance/freshness sufficient to avoid presenting stale inferred facts as timeless truth.
Only relevant learning context is retrieved for a request; the full learning store is not injected indiscriminately.
Learned data is not sold, used for advertising profiles or uploaded to cloud providers merely because learning is enabled.
Users can inspect, correct, scope and delete learning independently of Persistent Memory.
MCP Support
MCP is a first-class Dulche extension/runtime capability. Dulche MUST support acting as an MCP client for authorised local/remote MCP servers and acting as an MCP server when 9-1 intentionally exposes approved capabilities to external MCP clients. MCP execution MUST use the same permission, audit, cancellation, timeout and structured-error contracts as native Dulche tools.
Identity and lifecycle
Every configured MCP connection MUST have a stable ServerID independent of display name or transport address. Configuration MUST record role (client/server), transport/process/endpoint definition, credential references, trust state, capability snapshot/version and owner/scope. Credentials MUST be stored by secure reference and MUST NOT be embedded as plaintext in project manifests or logs.
Client connections MUST expose at least Disconnected, Connecting, Ready, Degraded, Reconnecting, Failed and Stopped states. Reconnect MUST NOT replay a previously completed consequential tool call. A broken connection returns structured transport/provider failures and MUST NOT be reported as Ready.
Capability discovery and schemas
Dulche MUST discover and represent the capabilities actually exposed by an MCP server, including tools and, where supported by the negotiated MCP version/server, resources and prompts. Tool input/output schemas MUST be validated before dispatch/consumption. Capability changes MUST invalidate stale cached schemas before later calls use them.
Capability identity is server-scoped: two MCP servers MAY expose the same human-readable tool name without collision because the canonical identity includes ServerID plus capability identity/name. User-facing aliases MAY exist but MUST NOT replace stable server-scoped identity.
Permissions and execution
Connecting to an MCP server does not authorise all capabilities it exposes. Each tool/resource capability MUST resolve through Dulche/Home permission and risk evaluation according to its effective read/write/external-side-effect scope. Server-provided descriptions/content MUST NOT grant permissions, alter trust state or override caller restrictions.
MCP tool execution MUST support cancellation/timeouts when supported by the active transport/server and MUST record when cancellation is best-effort or too late because an external action already completed. Results, approvals, failures, blockers and side effects MUST appear in ToolLog, AuditLog, FullLog and Action Graph like equivalent native tools.
Canonical MCP API
Dulche.MCP.Connect(config);
Dulche.MCP.Disconnect(serverID);
Dulche.MCP.ListServers();
Dulche.MCP.GetState(serverID);
Dulche.MCP.GetCapabilities(serverID);
Dulche.MCP.ListTools(serverID);
Dulche.MCP.CallTool(serverID, toolName, arguments);
Dulche.MCP.ListResources(serverID);
Dulche.MCP.ReadResource(serverID, resourceID);
Dulche.MCP.ListPrompts(serverID);
Dulche.MCP.GetPrompt(serverID, promptID, arguments?);
Dulche.MCP.Server.Start(config);
Dulche.MCP.Server.Stop(serverID);
Unsupported capabilities MUST return UnsupportedCapability rather than fabricated empty results. Protocol-version-specific functionality MAY extend this API while preserving compatibility with the stable core.
Tool Builder integration and acceptance
MCP projects produced by AI Studio Tool Builder MUST validate against the same Dulche MCP connection/schema/permission contract used at runtime. MCP support is implementation-complete only when local and remote connections can be configured, discovered, permissioned, called, cancelled/failed, reconnected and audited without bespoke per-app wiring, and when approved 9-1 capabilities can be exposed through server mode without bypassing their original permission model.
Plugins and web integrations — WebMCP and site-hosted MCP servers
Support MUST be added for WebMCP-enabled web pages and for remote MCP servers hosted by websites. These are distinct integration surfaces: browser-side WebMCP support alone does not satisfy remote MCP-server support, and connecting to a remote MCP endpoint alone does not satisfy WebMCP support.
The existing Plugin/MCP integration system MUST expose discovery/inspection, connection or permission setup, tool invocation, cancellation where supported, and disconnect/revocation for the appropriate surface. WebMCP integration MUST use the supported browser capability with explicit capability detection and origin boundaries. Site-hosted MCP connections MUST support the applicable remote HTTP transport and protocol-version/authentication contracts rather than assuming that a page URL is itself a valid MCP endpoint. The implementation MUST record supported browser/protocol versions and visibly report unsupported capabilities instead of claiming a successful integration.
Both routes MUST retain Home-brokered permissions, declared scopes, caller/site identity, secret protection and consequential-action approval. Tool descriptions, page content and tool results MUST NOT be treated as authority to expand permissions. These requirements include interoperability with websites exposing MCP servers; they do not silently select or purchase a new hosting service for the Sites application.
Web integration API and acceptance
Extend the existing canonical MCP/Plugin APIs for capability inspection, discovery, connection/authentication setup, invocation, supported cancellation and revocation. Browser-side WebMCP bindings MUST preserve browser origin/document identity; remote MCP bindings MUST preserve ServerID, endpoint identity and negotiated protocol/transport metadata. Test an authorised WebMCP-enabled page and a website-hosted remote MCP endpoint separately, then test unsupported browser/protocol, denied scopes, disconnected transport, cancellation limits and revocation. Neither route may claim success from a placeholder, silently use a page URL as an MCP endpoint or expose secrets in logs.
Skills + Plugins
Skills and Plugins are separate first-class Dulche extension types. A Skill packages reusable instructions, workflows, context rules and resources for model/Agent/Harness execution. A Plugin packages executable or integrated capabilities and MAY expose typed tools/actions, CUI surfaces or external-service functionality. Neither type is interchangeable with MCP, although a Skill or Plugin MAY declare an MCP dependency.
Common package contract
Every Skill and Plugin MUST have a versioned manifest containing stable PackageID, package type, version, minimum/compatible Dulche versions, provenance/origin, declared capabilities, required/requested permissions, dependencies, entry points/resources, update metadata and integrity/signature information when the distribution channel supports signing. Display name MUST NOT be used as package identity.
Manifest parsing and dependency resolution MUST be deterministic. Unknown required manifest fields/capabilities block installation or enablement with a structured compatibility failure; unknown optional fields MAY be preserved for forward compatibility. Packages MUST NOT execute code merely because their manifest was inspected or imported.
Lifecycle, trust and permissions
Installation, enablement, permissions and trust are separate states. Installing a package registers its files/manifest but MUST NOT automatically enable it for every caller, grant requested permissions, connect external accounts or grant Accept and Always Trust. Enablement only makes the package available within the selected scope; individual actions still use the normal Dulche/Home permission and risk model.
Package lifecycle MUST expose at least Installed, Disabled, Enabled, Updating, Failed and Quarantined states. A package that fails integrity/signature/compatibility validation MUST NOT become Enabled. Quarantine preserves evidence/metadata needed for diagnosis while preventing execution.
Updates MUST be version-aware and transactional. Dulche MUST validate/stage the new version and dependency graph before switching the active version. Failure during update MUST leave the previous known-good version available when rollback is technically possible. Package updates MUST NOT silently expand effective permissions; newly requested scopes require a new permission decision.
Uninstall MUST define what happens to package-owned persistent data. Shared/user-authored data MUST NOT be silently deleted merely because a package is removed. Orphaned package state MAY be retained for recovery/reinstall according to explicit retention policy.
Skill model
A Skill is primarily declarative. It MAY contain instructions, workflow definitions, templates/prompts, context-selection rules, examples, resources/files and references to permitted tools/Plugins/MCP capabilities. A Skill MUST NOT gain arbitrary code execution solely by being a Skill; executable behaviour requires an explicitly declared/authorised executable extension capability such as a Plugin/tool dependency.
Skill activation MUST be explicit and observable in request/run metadata. Dulche MUST record which Skill IDs/versions contributed to a request so Result provenance, logs and Action Graph can identify the active Skill set. Conflicting or incompatible Skills MUST resolve through a deterministic precedence/compatibility rule or return Conflict; Dulche MUST NOT silently merge contradictory required policies.
Built-in Persistent skill
Dulche MUST ship a first-party built-in Skill with the canonical display name Persistent and a stable reserved SkillID. Activating Persistent on a request sets that root request's PersistencePolicy to Persistent. The Skill is declarative: it changes Runtime orchestration semantics and does not gain permissions, tools, external access, budget or trust merely by being active.
Persistent activation MUST be explicit and visible in request metadata, the compose invocation state, FullLog and Action Graph. It MAY be invoked through the shared @ resource picker as @Persistent. The active version MUST be recorded like every other Skill so later inspection can prove which persistence contract governed the run.
The Persistent Skill MUST use the canonical Dulche persistent-request contract. In particular, an ordinary checkpoint, context compaction boundary, provider lease expiry, model restart, recoverable tool timeout or similar continuation boundary MUST NOT be treated as successful completion of the turn. The Runtime preserves/reconstructs execution state and continues under the same RootRequestID until the task's completion criteria are actually satisfied, the user explicitly stops it, or all remaining work is non-terminally AwaitingUser because of an unresolved blocker.
While a Persistent turn is running, an ordinary follow-up message sent by the user MUST join the same root turn as a SteeringMessage and MUST NOT implicitly cancel, replace or interrupt the active work. Dulche consumes the message at the next safe planning boundary, updates the plan and continues. Explicit Stop, explicit replace/edit semantics and any separately exposed interrupt/stack action retain their distinct meanings.
A blocker that cannot be resolved within the request's effective permission and capability bounds MUST be surfaced to the user as a structured blocker immediately. The blocker MUST isolate only the dependent work. Dulche MUST continue any independent runnable work in the same persistent turn; if no independent work remains, the turn enters AwaitingUser without being misreported as complete or timed out. When the blocker is resolved, the same durable turn resumes from current state rather than silently restarting completed work.
Persistent MUST remain compatible with automatic context compaction, Context Summarisation, Subagents, checkpoints, crash recovery and provider/model fallback. None of those mechanisms may erase completed side-effect evidence, duplicate consequential actions or weaken permission/approval requirements.
Plugin model
A Plugin MAY expose typed tools/actions, external-service connectors and optional CUI surfaces. Every exposed callable capability MUST declare input/output schemas, permission scopes, risk/side-effect classification and cancellation/timeout semantics where applicable. Plugin tool calls MUST enter the same ToolLog, AuditLog, FullLog and Action Graph pipeline as native tools and MCP calls.
Plugin CUI surfaces MUST render through approved CUI contracts and MUST NOT inject arbitrary trusted application code/markup outside the declared host surface. A Plugin surface does not inherit permission to invoke its Plugin’s actions without the applicable caller/user permission grants.
External-service Plugins MUST use secure credential references and explicit connection/account scopes. Provider tokens/secrets MUST NOT be stored in plaintext package files, logs or project definitions.
Dependencies and persistence
Package dependencies MUST be expressed by stable PackageID plus version/range and dependency type. Dulche MUST detect missing, cyclic and incompatible dependencies before enablement. Optional dependencies MUST be distinguishable from required dependencies so absence does not masquerade as a broken install.
Dulche Den MUST persist the installed package registry, active versions, enablement scopes, package provenance, dependency graph and relevant package state. Device-specific executable paths/caches remain device-local; shared Den state MUST NOT imply that executable packages are installed on another device unless that device independently satisfies installation/integrity requirements.
Canonical Skill API
Dulche.Skill.Install(package);
Dulche.Skill.List();
Dulche.Skill.Get(skillID);
Dulche.Skill.Enable(skillID, scope?);
Dulche.Skill.Disable(skillID, scope?);
Dulche.Skill.Update(skillID, version?);
Dulche.Skill.Uninstall(skillID);
Dulche.Skill.ResolveFor(request);
Canonical Plugin API
Dulche.Plugin.Install(package);
Dulche.Plugin.List();
Dulche.Plugin.Get(pluginID);
Dulche.Plugin.Enable(pluginID, scope?);
Dulche.Plugin.Disable(pluginID, scope?);
Dulche.Plugin.Update(pluginID, version?);
Dulche.Plugin.Uninstall(pluginID);
Dulche.Plugin.GetCapabilities(pluginID);
Dulche.Plugin.Invoke(pluginID, capability, arguments);
These are minimum canonical entry points. Tool Builder and other first-party clients MUST use the same package/runtime contracts rather than manipulating private package files or registries directly.
Tool Builder integration and acceptance
Skills and Plugins produced by AI Studio Tool Builder MUST validate against the exact manifest/schema/dependency/permission contracts used by Dulche after installation. First-class support is implementation-complete only when packages can be created, validated, installed, enabled/disabled, permissioned, updated/rolled back where supported, used in real Dulche requests, audited, persisted/recovered and uninstalled without bespoke per-app wiring or silent permission escalation.
External App Integrations
External App Integrations is the shared 9to1 framework for connecting, authenticating and operating third-party accounts/services. Authentication, provider scopes, transport, sync, webhooks, rate limits, provider-specific errors and remote-entity identity MUST be encapsulated by this shared layer rather than reimplemented independently inside each consuming app.
Core connection model
The framework MUST define stable typed entities for IntegrationProvider, Connection, ExternalAccount, IntegrationCapability, CredentialReference, RemoteEntityReference, SyncCursor, WebhookSubscription and ConnectionHealth or equivalent contracts. A Connection represents one authenticated provider/account relationship and has stable identity independent of whichever 9to1 app first created it.
Multiple accounts/connections for the same provider MUST be supported. For example, a user may connect separate personal and work Google accounts or multiple GitHub identities without those accounts being merged or ambiguously selected.
Connect once, reuse through authorised capabilities
A provider account should be connected once through the integration framework and then reused by authorised 9to1 surfaces. Consuming apps MUST request capabilities from the existing Connection rather than maintaining private duplicate credentials or running their own hidden authentication flows.
Examples include a Google connection supplying Drive capabilities to Files, Gmail capabilities to Mail, Calendar capabilities to Planner/Calendar and Contacts capabilities to relevant people pickers; a GitHub connection may supply repository/issue/pull-request capabilities to Stack, Dev or authorised Dulche Agents. The exact provider capabilities available remain determined by granted provider scopes and the integration adapter.
Provider scope versus 9to1 permission
Provider authorisation and 9to1 authorisation are separate gates. A Connection may possess provider scopes that a particular app, Agent, Skill, Plugin or extension is not authorised to use. Both the remote provider scope and the applicable 9to1 permission/capability policy MUST allow an operation before it is executed.
Connecting an account MUST NOT implicitly grant every 9to1 surface unrestricted access to that account. Permission decisions should be made at an appropriate capability/resource scope and remain inspectable/revocable.
Typed capability contracts
Consuming apps SHOULD depend on provider-neutral typed capabilities where equivalent semantics exist instead of embedding provider-specific endpoint logic. Examples include Files.List/Read/Upload, Mail.Search/Read/Send, Calendar.ListEvents/CreateEvent, Contacts.Search, Git.ListRepositories/CreateIssue and Chat.ListMessages or equivalent canonical contracts.
Provider adapters map those typed capabilities onto the provider's API. Provider-specific features that cannot be represented faithfully through a common contract may be exposed through explicit provider-namespaced capabilities; the common abstraction MUST NOT silently discard important provider semantics merely to force false parity.
Capability schemas MUST declare input/output shape, supported operations, required provider scopes, relevant 9to1 permissions, pagination/streaming behaviour, provider limitations and error states.
Authentication and credential storage
The integration framework centrally owns supported authentication flows such as OAuth/OIDC, PKCE, device-code flows, API-key authentication or provider-specific enterprise methods where appropriate. Apps MUST NOT request or persist reusable provider credentials directly when the integration framework can broker them.
Credential material such as access tokens, refresh tokens, API keys, passwords and private keys MUST live in approved secure credential storage. Integration records, Den records, logs, exports and app settings store credential references/connection identities rather than plaintext reusable secrets.
Token refresh, expiry, revocation and provider reauthentication are lifecycle concerns of the integration framework. A consumer receives a capability result or typed authentication-required failure, not raw credentials it can reuse arbitrarily.
Scope escalation
If a Connection exists but lacks a provider scope required by a new capability, the consuming surface requests scope escalation through the shared integration framework. The user must be shown which additional provider access is being requested and why. The framework extends/replaces the existing authorisation where the provider supports it rather than creating a hidden duplicate connection.
Remote identity and canonical 9to1 entities
External objects MUST retain their remote identity and provenance. A RemoteEntityReference should identify the provider, Connection, remote object ID, remote revision/version where available, remote URL/reference and any mapped canonical 9to1 entity.
Opening or referencing a remote object does not automatically create a separate canonical copy. The UI and APIs MUST distinguish operations such as Open remote, Import/copy into 9to1, Link/reference and Keep synchronised.
Where an external object is mapped to a canonical 9to1 entity, the relationship must remain explicit so the system does not create multiple disconnected local copies of the same remote item or accidentally treat provider IDs as globally unique without Connection/provider context.
Live, cached, imported and synchronised state
The integration layer MUST distinguish live remote data, cached metadata, cached content, imported local copies and synchronised mirrors. Consuming apps must be able to determine whether displayed information is current, cached, stale or locally diverged.
Caching policies must respect provider terms, account permissions, data sensitivity and user settings. A cached object must not be presented as live merely because a prior request succeeded.
Sync, webhooks and change feeds
Where a provider supports webhooks, push notifications or incremental change feeds, the integration framework SHOULD use them rather than each app independently polling the same account. It owns webhook registration/renewal/validation, change cursors, deduplication, retry/backoff and background refresh.
Polling remains available where required by the provider or capability, but should be centralised enough to avoid redundant traffic and quota consumption. Sync state must include sufficient cursor/revision information to continue incrementally after restart or temporary offline periods.
Offline and queued-operation behaviour
Consumers may continue to display authorised cached state while a provider is unavailable, but the stale/offline state and last successful sync/freshness information MUST remain visible when material. The framework MUST NOT silently claim remote mutations succeeded when they have only been queued locally.
If queued remote writes are supported, each operation needs stable identity, retry/idempotency semantics, dependency ordering where applicable, visible pending/failed state and explicit conflict handling. Reconnection must not blindly replay an action that is no longer valid or that already completed remotely.
Conflicts and versioning
For synchronised/mirrored objects, use provider revision identifiers, ETags/version tokens or equivalent change metadata where available. Wall-clock timestamps alone MUST NOT be the only conflict authority.
Compatible disjoint edits may be merged where the owning capability can prove a safe merge. Otherwise preserve both versions or surface a conflict to the owning app/user. Provider-side deletion, permission loss and remote moves/renames require explicit typed states rather than being treated as generic missing-file errors.
Connection health and failure states
Connections expose typed health/lifecycle states such as Connected, AuthenticationRequired, ScopeRequired, RateLimited, ProviderUnavailable, Degraded, SyncError, Revoked and Disabled or equivalent. Apps consume these states and present appropriate user-facing recovery rather than leaking raw HTTP/provider exceptions.
Health information should include the failing capability/provider account where relevant, last successful contact/sync, retryability and the action required from the user when one exists.
Rate limits and reliability
The shared layer MUST centrally support pagination, retry-after handling, provider quotas, transient network retries, exponential backoff/jitter, idempotency, request cancellation, partial response handling and provider-specific service limits. Consuming apps MUST NOT each invent incompatible retry/quota behaviour.
Connection management UI
9to1 MUST provide a central integrations management surface, hosted under the appropriate Home/Settings area, showing provider, connected account identity, connection status, provider-granted scopes/capabilities, authorised 9to1 consumers where exposed, recent/last successful activity, errors, reconnect/re-authorise, permission management and disconnect/revoke actions.
Individual apps may deep-link into this management flow or expose capability-specific connection prompts, but connection state remains owned by the shared framework.
Dulche and Agent access
Dulche, Agents and AI surfaces use External App Integrations through the same typed capabilities and permissions as first-party apps. Dulche does not own a parallel account-authentication layer.
For example, a request to find an email uses an authorised Mail capability for an existing connection; a request to create a GitHub issue uses the relevant Git capability. Normal Dulche tool/action permissions and consequential-action confirmation requirements still apply. Merely connecting an account does not grant every Agent permission to mutate it.
Relationship to Plugins and MCP
External App Integrations, Plugins and MCP are distinct abstractions. External App Integrations represent durable authenticated third-party account/service relationships and their capabilities. Plugins are installable packages that may add executable/integrated functionality. MCP is a protocol by which Dulche can discover/use tools/resources.
They may interoperate: a Plugin may register a provider adapter; an integration capability may be surfaced to Dulche through an approved tool/MCP bridge. Such composition MUST preserve the underlying Connection identity, provider scopes and 9to1 permission checks rather than laundering authority through another abstraction.
Provider SDK and extension
9to1 SHOULD expose a versioned Integration Provider SDK/manifest contract so additional providers can be implemented without changing every consuming app. A provider definition can declare provider identity/branding metadata, authentication method, capability schemas, provider scopes, remote entity types, webhook/change-feed support, rate-limit semantics, health checks and provider-specific settings.
Third-party provider adapters remain sandboxed/permissioned according to their implementation model. Registering a provider does not grant unrestricted access to other Connections, credential stores or unrelated local data.
Disconnect and revocation
Disconnect semantics MUST be explicit and predictable. Disconnecting a Connection should stop sync/background activity, invalidate or remove local credential references as appropriate, disable provider capabilities and clear/expire caches according to policy. Where supported and requested, provider-side token revocation should also be attempted.
Disconnecting an account MUST NOT automatically delete unrelated local 9to1 artifacts previously imported from it. For linked/synchronised objects, the UI must explain what local data remains, what becomes unavailable and whether any pending remote operations are abandoned.
Security invariants
Possessing a provider credential does not grant any app, Agent, Skill, Plugin or extension unrestricted access to the associated account.
Every external operation must pass both provider scope/capability validation and the relevant 9to1 permission boundary.
Consuming apps receive capability access/results, not raw reusable credentials.
Connection/account identity, remote-object identity, provenance and provider limitations must remain explicit across app boundaries.
Logs, exports and Den records must not contain plaintext reusable provider secrets.
External App Integrations acceptance requirements
One authenticated Connection can be reused safely by multiple authorised 9to1 apps without duplicated credentials or hidden per-app OAuth implementations.
Multiple accounts per provider are unambiguous and stable.
Typed provider-neutral capabilities work where semantics align, with provider-specific extensions exposed explicitly rather than silently discarded.
Provider scopes and 9to1 consumer permissions are enforced as independent gates.
Live/cached/imported/synchronised states, remote identity and conflict/version state remain explicit and recoverable.
Webhooks/change feeds, polling, retries, rate limits, queued operations and connection health are handled centrally with deterministic failure semantics.
Dulche/Agents use the same connection/capability layer and cannot bypass account permissions.
Disconnect/revocation, secure credential storage and provider SDK integration are implemented without deleting unrelated local artifacts or exposing reusable secrets.
9to1-OS
Platform foundation and donor authority
9to1-OS is derived from the latest appropriate maintained Ubuntu/GNOME stack. The project forks/adapts the complete relevant desktop/system stack rather than treating Ubuntu merely as a kernel image, then rebuilds the 9to1 user-facing desktop environment and first-party system interfaces in CUI.NET while preserving mature non-replaced functionality underneath.
The governing donor rule is preserve unless replaced: applicable Ubuntu/GNOME behaviour, hardware support, accessibility, session management, networking, Bluetooth, audio, displays, power, notifications, multi-monitor support, virtual desktops, filesystem/system integration and other mature platform behaviour MUST remain available unless this specification explicitly replaces or supersedes it.
Where 9to1 requires a CUI.NET replacement for functionality already supplied by Ubuntu/GNOME and that 9to1 product does not already have a different authoritative donor, the latest appropriate corresponding Ubuntu/GNOME application becomes its donor. The replacement preserves applicable donor functionality and rebuilds/extends its GUI in CUI.NET. Existing explicitly assigned donors take precedence; Files, for example, retains its existing donor rather than switching to the Ubuntu file manager.
Once an authoritative 9to1 app fully replaces a donor graphical application, the duplicate donor user-facing app SHOULD be removed from the default OS image. Required lower-level libraries/services remain installed where technically necessary. The objective is functional preservation without parallel competing GUIs.
Desktop shell and Windows-style interaction model
The default 9to1-OS shell uses a familiar Windows-like desktop interaction model while retaining Linux/Ubuntu capabilities. Conventional minimise, maximise/restore and close controls, taskbar representation, window switching, context menus, system tray/status, desktop workspaces and predictable mouse/keyboard behaviour are first-class rather than hidden or intentionally omitted.
Window management and quality-of-life
Drag windows to edges/corners to preview and snap them into supported layouts.
Support built-in and user-defined snap layouts, including half, thirds, quarters and custom rectangular regions with configurable gaps/margins.
Provide smooth configurable window movement, open/close, minimise/restore, maximise, snapping and desktop-transition animations, with reduced-motion/disabled options.
Support conventional app/window switching, previews, multiple windows per app, virtual-desktop awareness, task-view/overview and keyboard-first operation.
Support user-configurable per-app/window rules such as initial monitor, desktop, size, snap region, maximised/fullscreen and always-on-top where compatible.
Linux/GTK/Qt and other compatible desktop applications remain runnable even when they are not CUI-native. They participate in the taskbar, window switching, snapping, desktops and supported system integration to the extent the underlying platform permits.
Taskbar framework
The taskbar is a first-class highly customisable shell framework, not a fixed strip of running applications. The default layout places Go at the left/start position and system/status controls toward the end, but supported regions/items can be rearranged.
Users can configure edge/position, floating versus edge-attached presentation, width, thickness, margins, corner radius, padding, item spacing, alignment, opacity, blur/material, borders, shadows, icon size, labels, grouping/combining, auto-hide/intelligent hide, animations, per-monitor behaviour, clock/tray content and compatible multi-row or multiple-taskbar arrangements.
Taskbar Layers
A taskbar instance supports between one and five independently configurable Taskbar Layers. Scrolling or a configured vertical gesture while the pointer/focus is over the taskbar moves discretely between adjacent layers and snaps to a complete layer; layers are not an infinitely scrollable strip.
Every layer has stable identity, name/order, item layout, presentation and visibility settings. Layers may differ in item size, alignment, grouping, height and visual presentation where supported. A visible accessible layer-position indicator shows the current position and number of available layers; its presentation can be configured but must not rely on colour alone.
A layer can contain typed items such as pinned/running apps, individual windows, Go, system controls, quick actions, settings, files/folders, Shelf items/collections, 9to1 routes, Dulche Agents, Agent runs, Automations actions, widgets, status indicators, media controls, spacers and authorised extension-provided modules.
Examples are illustrative rather than hard-coded: one user may create Running Apps, Quick Actions, AI Agents, Development and Personal layers. No layer type is reserved to a specific category.
Desktop Spaces, Virtual Desktops and Desktop Pages
Naming and conceptual separation
The OS-level mode system is named Desktop Spaces. The existing conversational/AI product is named LLM Spaces. Documentation, APIs and UI MUST use these distinct names to avoid ambiguity.
Virtual Desktops organise sets of windows within the current shell experience. Desktop Spaces redefine the surrounding shell/interaction experience. Desktop Pages are multiple pages of desktop icons/widgets within a desktop surface. These are separate orthogonal concepts.
Desktop Spaces
A Desktop Space is a versioned shell/behaviour profile that may change taskbars, taskbar layers, Go layout, quick settings, notification presentation, window rules, widgets/overlays, input model, theme, animations, performance/resource profile, default actions and Dulche behaviour without requiring applications to restart where avoidable.
First-party examples include a Gaming Desktop Space that can replace the standard taskbar with a lightweight floating gaming pill showing configurable telemetry such as FPS/frame time, CPU/GPU/RAM/VRAM, temperature, battery/power and latency, with an expandable quick menu; and a Touch Desktop Space that increases targets/spacing and adapts window controls, Go, quick settings, gestures, keyboard integration and snapping for tablet use.
Users can create, duplicate, rename, reorder, import/export, sync and delete custom Desktop Spaces. Optional triggers may suggest or activate a Desktop Space based on convertible posture, controller connection, application launch, display configuration, schedule or other supported state; automatic activation behaviour is user-controlled.
Virtual Desktops
Virtual Desktops support create/delete, names, ordering, keyboard/touchpad switching, window movement between desktops, configurable transition, task-view overview, optional per-desktop wallpaper and configurable taskbar visibility across current/all desktops.
Desktop Pages and Widgets
Each desktop surface can contain multiple ordered Desktop Pages that users may add/remove, rename, reorder and navigate by configured gesture/scroll. Pages may contain icons, files/folders, Shelf collections, shortcuts and native CUI widgets and may be global or Desktop-Space-specific according to configuration.
Desktop widgets are first-class CUI entities with resizing, grid/free placement where enabled, ordering, transparency/background material, interaction, update policy and per-page/per-Desktop-Space presence. First-party apps can expose widgets such as Planner, Maps, Files folders, Shelf collections, media, system resources, battery, clock/calendar, quick actions, Dulche Agents and Agent-run state.
Customisation Framework
Customisation is an architectural property of 9to1-OS. The requirement is not satisfied by wallpaper, accent colour and taskbar-position options. Stable shell behaviour and presentation that can reasonably be represented as configuration SHOULD be configurable unless doing so would materially compromise security, accessibility, compatibility or system integrity.
The OS MUST expose substantially deeper supported first-party customisation than stock Windows or stock GNOME without requiring registry hacks, shell patches, unsupported extensions or third-party Start/taskbar replacements. Configuration uses versioned typed schemas and transactions so Settings, Dulche, Automations and authorised extensions operate on the same underlying state.
Configuration scopes and precedence
Applicable settings can be scoped globally, per device, display, Desktop Space, Virtual Desktop, application/window class or input mode. The implementation MUST define deterministic precedence so a Desktop-Space/display/app override cannot unpredictably conflict with global defaults. Device/display-specific state must not be blindly synced to incompatible hardware.
Visual and behavioural scope
Mouse pointer/cursor theme, colour, size, outline/high-visibility behaviour and supported custom pointer packs.
Window button order/side, visible controls, button size/spacing/shape, title alignment, titlebar height, icon/title visibility and compatible extra window actions.
Window corner roundness, borders, shadows, glow, transparency, active/inactive treatment and user-selectable numerical/preset radius where supported.
Theme profiles covering light/dark/automatic mode, colours, gradients, accents, glow, blur, transparency, shadows, borders, roundness, spacing/density, typography, icons, control shapes and animation character.
Built-in visual personalities such as clean/minimal, glow, playful, glass/classic or other first-party presets act as editable starting profiles rather than locked themes; users can create custom profiles.
Icon packs, per-app icon overrides, icon scale/shape/treatment and notification-badge presentation.
Global and per-category animation enablement, speed, reduced-motion and presets/custom timing.
Rebindable keyboard shortcuts, supported mouse/touchpad/touch/controller gestures and conflict detection.
System tray/status ordering, visibility policy, overflow, icon size/spacing, clock/date/seconds/time-zone presentation, battery percentage/remaining-time presentation and network/audio/Bluetooth/VPN indicators.
Safe application and recovery
Large shell changes SHOULD support preview/keep/revert flows. Configuration mutations are transactional where practical and the shell maintains last-known-good recovery paths including reset current element, reset taskbar, reset Desktop Space, reset appearance, restore previous configuration and safe/default shell mode.
Configuration schemas are versioned and migrations MUST preserve supported user state across OS updates rather than silently discarding a highly customised desktop.
Quick Settings and system flyouts
Quick Settings combines Windows-style desktop system controls with Android-style customisation. Users can add/remove/reorder tiles, choose supported sizes, resize tiles, use multiple pages, configure layout/density/panel placement and install authorised custom tiles.
First-party tiles should cover relevant controls such as Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, airplane mode, brightness, volume/audio output, microphone, battery saver/performance mode, night light, accessibility, hotspot, VPN, display/casting, input, focus/do-not-disturb, location, screenshot/recording and Dulche/AI state.
Tiles are typed CUI modules that may expose live state, icon, primary/secondary labels, toggle/action, slider and expanded view. Apps/Plugins may register tiles through a permissioned contract with declared supported sizes/actions; arbitrary shell code injection is not a tile API.
Related flyouts such as audio, network, Bluetooth, calendar, battery and notification centre must provide friendly direct controls and the expected Windows-class QoL, including optional battery percentage, output-device switching, tray overflow, date/calendar, power/session controls and useful status detail.
Dulche and AI-native OS integration
Dulche is an always-available OS assistant, not merely another application. 'Always available' does not require a large model to remain permanently resident: users control model residency/background behaviour while the lightweight service remains integrated with Go AI mode, shortcuts, voice where enabled, context menus, selections, taskbar layers/widgets, notifications, Settings and first-party apps.
AI settings
Settings contains first-class AI areas for Models/Universal Model Picker, Dulche service/background behaviour, Always-active AI, Persistent Memory and Memory Frequency, Background Learning, Agents, MCP servers, Skills/Plugins, privacy and resource policy. Built-in MCP management includes add/remove, transport/endpoint configuration, authentication, capability inspection, enable/disable, Agent/app permission assignment, health and logs/errors.
Always-active AI is a configurable service mode and MUST NOT grant blanket access to microphone, files, external services or other sensitive capabilities. Those remain separately permissioned.
AI-aware RAM optimisation
The default OS must be aggressively memory-efficient without sacrificing specified functionality or quality so local models can use more of the machine. 9to1-OS should lazy-load non-critical services/surfaces, suspend or trim eligible inactive apps, reclaim caches, use appropriate compression/zram and memory mapping, avoid duplicated runtime state and unload inactive models/compatibility environments when policy permits.
Users can configure a managed System Memory Budget/profile such as Minimum, Balanced, Performance, AI/Maximum model capacity or Custom. This is a target for reclaimable/non-critical OS consumption rather than an unsafe hard cap on kernel/critical services.
An optional Prioritise AI memory policy may reclaim eligible caches/background apps/models more aggressively to make room for a requested local model. Dulche/runtime should report what can be reclaimed and coordinate with the OS resource manager rather than simply failing at the first memory-pressure condition.
GUI-first administration
Common useful system-administration operations that Ubuntu frequently exposes primarily through Terminal SHOULD have first-party CUI.NET workflows wherever they can be represented safely and coherently. Terminal remains fully available for advanced/unrestricted workflows, but ordinary maintenance must not require memorising shell commands.
Software/package install, removal, update and repository/source management.
System updates, recovery, backups/snapshots and repair.
Drivers, devices, displays, audio, networking, DNS, VPN, firewall and hotspot.
Disk/partition/filesystem management, mounts, storage cleanup and health information.
Users/groups, permissions/ownership, startup/background services, scheduled jobs and environment/PATH management where appropriate.
Logs/journal/crash diagnostics, process/resource management and compatibility/runtime management.
Friendly GUIs should call stable typed system services/APIs rather than merely concatenate opaque shell strings. Where a shell tool is the only practical backend, arguments must be structured, privilege requirements declared and output/errors/progress handled safely.
Terminal safety and privileged destructive operations
9to1 Terminal Command Mode includes a Dangerous Command Guard that parses known commands/arguments/targets and classifies risk rather than relying only on substring matching. Potentially major irreversible operations such as destructive recursive deletion, filesystem formatting, partition-table mutation, mass permission changes or dangerous system/boot-path modification require OS-mediated protection.
For a Dangerous operation the mandatory sequence is consequence-specific warning -> trusted user authentication -> second consequence-specific confirmation -> execution. Authentication is never treated as final consent. The warning should identify resolved targets and expected consequence where feasible.
Terminal AI Mode, Dulche, Agents, Plugins and Automations cannot type the password, approve their own warning or bypass the final confirmation. Script/program execution cannot be perfectly predicted; recognised dangerous privileged operations should still pass through the system safety broker where technically possible, without claiming semantic proof over arbitrary executable code.
Multiple users and administrator policy
9to1-OS supports multiple isolated user accounts/profiles with standard and administrator roles, secure per-user data/settings/secrets, fast switching/sign-out and clearly scoped system-wide versus user-specific configuration.
Administrators can create managed policy profiles for family, school, organisation or kiosk-style deployments. Policies can control application allow/deny lists, package/app installation, external providers, Plugins/MCP, Terminal/admin access, removable storage, networking/VPN, Desktop Space/customisation options, web/content controls where supported, update policy and other security-sensitive capabilities.
A School profile can, for example, block launching unapproved applications and prevent the restricted user from disabling that policy without administrator authentication. Enforcement MUST occur below the normal app UI so renaming a binary, launching through Go/Terminal/Shelf or invoking an Agent does not trivially bypass policy.
Managed restrictions must be visible and attributable ('Managed by administrator/school policy') rather than presented as broken UI. Administrators require auditability of policy changes and clear recovery controls; administration must not silently expose another user's private content unless an explicit policy/capability legitimately grants that access.
First-party apps and deep OS integration
All release-scope first-party 9to1 applications are installed by default as part of the complete 9to1-OS experience, while application updates are independently deliverable from full OS updates. A central update/package service handles discovery, automatic/manual updates, integrity checks, history, repair and supported rollback instead of every app shipping a private updater.
First-party apps MUST behave as native OS components and register applicable typed integration with Go, Automations, Dulche, notifications, taskbar/layers, Desktop Spaces, widgets, system search/indexing, Files/open-with/default apps, share/clipboard/drag-drop, URI routes, permissions, External App Integrations, background tasks, crash/System Log, updates, backup/recovery, theming/accessibility and resource management.
Automations is a particularly strong integration requirement: apps should expose supported typed triggers/actions/events through the shared Automation framework rather than implementing incompatible private automation engines.
First-party apps should expose lifecycle information allowing safe trim/suspend/resume under memory pressure without losing unsaved work. Desktop Spaces own shell layout/presentation; apps contribute declared widgets/actions/status rather than taking arbitrary control of the shell.
Setup and first-run experience
9to1-OS MUST provide a friendly graphical CUI.NET installer and first-run/OOBE experience. A normal installation MUST NOT require interacting with the traditional Linux text/terminal installer or memorising shell commands. Advanced/technical options may be exposed through expandable UI without making them mandatory for ordinary users.
The setup flow should cover applicable language/region, keyboard, accessibility from the first screen, networking, installation target/disk choices, encryption, timezone, user creation and administrator role, optional managed school/organisation setup, privacy/telemetry choices, update preferences, restore from an existing 9to1 backup/profile, initial appearance/Desktop-Space choices and optional Dulche/model/provider onboarding.
Installation progress is staged and truthful. Failures expose actionable explanation, retry/back navigation where safe, logs/technical details and recovery rather than dropping users into an unexplained terminal. Critical-stage failure MUST NOT be presented as successful installation.
Recovery environments
9to1-OS provides a custom CUI recovery environment designed for ordinary users. It should expose Continue/boot normally, automatic startup repair, restore a previous healthy snapshot, undo the latest system update, safe mode, package/system repair, filesystem/disk checks, disable problematic drivers or shell extensions, recover/reset shell configuration, inspect System Log, backup/restore, advanced Terminal and supported repair/reinstall-with-data-preservation flows.
The custom 9to1 Recovery environment supplements rather than replaces the underlying Ubuntu/Linux recovery environment. The stock/default recovery path MUST remain available as an emergency fallback if the custom CUI recovery environment is damaged or cannot launch.
The custom and stock recovery paths must obey the existing boot-safety contract: ordinary snapshot restore, repair and rollback do not rewrite firmware or bootloader code. Any bootloader/firmware update is a separate tightly guarded operation.
Setup/recovery acceptance requirements
A normal user can install, create an account, configure basic hardware/privacy choices and reach the desktop without Terminal.
Accessibility and technical details are available during setup rather than only after installation.
9to1 Recovery provides friendly repair/rollback tools, while the lower-level Ubuntu/Linux recovery environment remains independently reachable.
Installer/recovery failures preserve diagnostic information and do not falsely report success or silently perform bootloader/firmware rewrites.
System updates, recovery and backups
System maintenance has a first-party CUI Settings workflow for checking, downloading, scheduling and installing OS updates, viewing changelogs/details, restart requirements, progress, failure/retry and update history. Terminal/package-manager commands remain optional advanced interfaces, never the required normal update path.
Consequential system updates use verified recoverable system snapshots/rollback state where technically feasible. The system should confirm successful boot/health before retiring rollback state and provide a friendly recovery environment with restore previous snapshot, repair OS/package database, safe mode, diagnostic logs and extension/driver disablement.
Ordinary backup/snapshot restoration and update rollback MUST NOT overwrite or restore firmware or bootloader code as part of the rollback transaction. Bootloader/firmware updates, if ever necessary, are separate tightly guarded operations with their own compatibility/recovery process so a normal failed OS update is not turned into a bricked device.
Software and package management
9to1-OS includes a friendly CUI graphical package manager with search, categories, source/publisher, version, architecture, size, installed/update state, screenshots/metadata where available, dependency/permission information and install/update/uninstall/repair workflows.
The package manager uses typed PackageProvider adapters for applicable Linux package ecosystems such as Ubuntu/Debian packages, Flatpak, Snap if retained and coherent AppImage handling, plus Winget for supported Windows/Wine scenarios and 9to1 package sources. It may show multiple sources for the same product and explain meaningful differences instead of silently choosing an arbitrary provider.
PackageProvider contracts define search, metadata, versions, install/update/uninstall, dependencies, progress, source trust, errors and capability limitations so additional providers can integrate without rewriting the package-manager UI.
System diagnostics and storage management
System Log and crash diagnostics
9to1-OS includes a CUI System Log surface that translates underlying journal/service/app events into useful searchable/filterable diagnostics while retaining advanced technical detail. Events can expose timestamp, component/process, severity, subsystem, version/build, crash ID, stack/debug data where available and related logs/actions.
Crash records should group repeated failures, support export/diagnostic bundles and permit user-authorised Dulche analysis such as explaining why a component repeatedly crashed. Diagnostic information MUST NOT be silently uploaded.
Disk Management
Settings includes CUI Disk Management covering physical disks, partitions, filesystems, mounts, labels, free/used space, removable storage, format/partition operations, encryption state, filesystem checks and SMART/health data where supported. Destructive operations require clear device identification and appropriate confirmation/authentication.
Task Manager and other donor-backed utilities
Task Manager is rebuilt in CUI.NET using the appropriate Ubuntu/GNOME system-monitor tooling as donor baseline unless another donor is explicitly assigned. It preserves mature process/resource functionality and extends it with Windows-style usability plus 9to1-specific visibility for models, Agents, containers/compatibility environments and relevant GPU/RAM usage.
The same donor fallback rule applies to Settings and other required CUI system utilities when an appropriate Ubuntu/GNOME app exists and no different donor has already been assigned.
9to1-OS acceptance requirements
Ubuntu/GNOME mature non-replaced functionality is preserved while the authoritative user-facing shell/system GUIs are CUI.NET and duplicate replaced donor apps are removed from the default image.
The taskbar is deeply customisable and supports one to five discrete snapping layers with a visible accessible layer indicator.
Desktop Spaces, Virtual Desktops, Desktop Pages and LLM Spaces remain explicitly separate concepts.
The shell supports deep first-party customisation of taskbar, Go, Quick Settings, pointer, window chrome/roundness, themes, widgets, desktops, gestures, tray/status, animations and scoped per-device/display/Desktop-Space/app behaviour.
Dulche, MCP, models and AI-aware memory/resource controls are first-class OS settings and Dulche is always available without requiring a heavyweight model to remain loaded.
Common administration has friendly CUI workflows and Dangerous Terminal operations use warning -> authentication -> final confirmation.
Multiple users and enforceable administrator-managed profiles can restrict unapproved apps and other capabilities without trivial bypass through alternate launch surfaces.
All first-party 9to1 apps ship installed by default, update independently and integrate deeply with shared OS services including Automations.
System updates have GUI installation, verified recovery/rollback mechanisms and ordinary rollback does not rewrite firmware/bootloader code.
A friendly multi-provider package manager, System Log/crash diagnostics, Disk Management and donor-backed Task Manager/Settings are present as first-class CUI system utilities.
Go
Go is the universal Start/search/action surface for 9to1-OS. It combines the roles of a Windows-style Start menu, system-wide search, application launcher and contextual quick-action surface. Go is an OS primitive, not a separate heavyweight application, and the default taskbar places Go at the left/start position.
Default surface
Opening Go without a query presents a customisable home surface that can contain Pinned items, Recent items, Suggested/contextual items, All Apps, recent files/projects, quick system actions, account/session controls and power controls. Users can reorder, hide, resize or regroup supported sections and choose compact search-first, Start-menu-like or larger dashboard-oriented layouts.
All Apps is a first-class Go view containing installed applications/programs available to the current user/profile. It is separate from the Android-style Launcher app drawer. Go is the primary application-launcher replacement for the 9to1-OS desktop shell.
Search and AI modes
Go provides a Search / AI switcher. Search is deterministic universal search/navigation; AI routes natural-language intent through Dulche while using the same canonical Go providers and typed OS/app actions.
Examples of AI-mode requests include opening the project the user was working on, finding the setting that controls display scaling, launching a group of development tools or locating notes by context. AI mode MUST NOT fabricate applications, files, settings or entities that do not exist and MUST surface ambiguity when multiple plausible targets remain.
Universal provider model
Applications, frameworks and authorised extensions register typed GoProviders rather than requiring Go to hard-code product-specific databases. Providers may expose search, suggestions, recent items, result categories, previews, aliases, quick actions, indexing/change notifications and query-time-only results.
Go may search applications, files/folders, settings, people/contacts, LLM Spaces/conversations where authorised, Boards, Planner tasks/events, Maps places, Shelf items/collections, Stack repositories/branches, Dev projects, browser history/bookmarks where enabled, installed tools, Plugins/extensions and registered system actions.
Canonical identity
Go returns references to canonical entities owned by their source application/framework. Its local index may cache identifiers, search fields, aliases, presentation metadata, permissions and freshness state, but MUST NOT create a competing canonical copy of a file, document, project, place, person or other result merely because it is searchable.
Ranking and context
Ranking may combine exact/prefix/fuzzy match, aliases, keywords, recency, frequency, pins/favourites, current app, active project, current canonical object, Desktop Space, user-enabled Background Learning and provider relevance. Context can change ranking and available actions but never bypass access controls or change the canonical identity of a result.
Typed actions
Results can expose owner-provided typed actions such as Open, Reveal, Share, Navigate, New window, Pin, Create, Toggle, Open with or app-specific commands. Go may invoke these actions directly where appropriate but MUST NOT reproduce another app's private business logic.
Consequential actions remain subject to the underlying OS/app permission and confirmation requirements. Go and Dulche cannot use a quick-action surface to bypass security prompts.
Filters and previews
Go supports optional user-selectable filters/categories such as Apps, Files, People, Settings, Places, Projects and Actions plus provider-defined categories where useful. Results may expose compact CUI previews supplied from canonical provider data.
Indexing, privacy and freshness
Providers declare whether they are locally indexed, queried live or hybrid. They can push changed entities, invalidate deleted entities and request re-indexing. Search results MUST be permission-filtered before display, including for restricted folders/projects, managed user profiles and lock-screen contexts.
Users can disable sensitive providers/categories such as browser history, message contents or private project indexing. Stale/offline remote results must be marked with their freshness state and invalid/deleted results removed rather than accumulating as zombie entries.
Scoped reuse
The same Go framework may be embedded as a scoped picker/search surface in Launcher, Files, Shelf and other apps, and Dulche may query Go for authorised entity discovery. These are scoped views over the same provider contracts, not separate incompatible search engines.
Performance and failure isolation
Opening Go should be effectively immediate. Local providers should stream results incrementally; slow remote providers MUST NOT block applications, local files, settings or cached results. Failure of one provider is isolated and reported only for that provider.
Go acceptance requirements
Go acts as the primary 9to1-OS Start menu, universal search and quick-action surface, with Go at the default left/start taskbar position.
Pinned, Recent, Suggested and All Apps views are first-class and deeply customisable.
Search and AI modes use the same canonical entity/provider/action contracts; AI mode cannot hallucinate unavailable entities.
Search results remain permission-filtered canonical references rather than duplicate Go-owned objects.
Provider failures and remote latency do not block local search/launch functionality.
Universal Model Picker
On 9to1-OS, the Universal Model Picker is the OS-hosted presentation of the same canonical Dulche/Home model/provider state used by regular 9to1. Model identities, provider connections, ordered Model Routes, active/background routing, category overrides, fallbacks, permissions and usage state MUST remain interoperable across Home and 9to1-OS rather than becoming separate OS-only configuration.
The OS picker provides the same compact selection experience plus deeper integration with Settings → AI, system resource management, administrator policy and local-model lifecycle. It can expose local/cloud/remote identity, capabilities, reasoning/effort controls, aliases/nicknames, route order, fallback state, locality/privacy, loading/residency, RAM/VRAM fit and per-app/Agent/Desktop-Space overrides.
9to1-OS may host the picker natively while Windows regular 9to1 hosts it through Home, but both clients MUST read/write the same versioned routing contracts and Dulche model catalogue. A route configured in Home remains meaningful on 9to1-OS subject to device-local model availability, provider authentication, administrator policy and device-specific resource constraints.
OS resource and policy integration
When a selected local model requires additional memory, the picker integrates with the 9to1-OS resource broker to show required/available/reclaimable RAM/VRAM and may request permitted reclamation before declaring the model unavailable. It MUST distinguish Installed, Unloaded, Loading, Loaded, Offloaded/Partially loaded where supported and Unavailable due to resources.
Administrator-managed user profiles can restrict allowed models/providers, cloud use, model acquisition and routing fallback. Model ordering MUST never bypass those restrictions; policy-ineligible candidates are filtered before route selection.
Shared-routing invariant
Ordered model fallback is a shared 9to1 capability, not an OS-specific behaviour. Requests from regular 9to1/Home and 9to1-OS use the same eligibility-first routing semantics: determine required capabilities and policy constraints, filter the configured route, then choose the highest-priority eligible available model and fall through only on classified model/provider-routing conditions.
Wine/WinBoat Framework
The Wine/WinBoat Framework is the unified 9to1-OS compatibility platform for non-native application packages. It provides one coherent installation, routing, execution, lifecycle, permissions, diagnostics and shell-integration model across Windows applications and Android APK applications rather than exposing Wine, VM/container tooling or an Android runtime as unrelated expert-only subsystems.
Compatibility backends
A CompatibilityBackend is a typed implementation capable of installing/running one or more foreign application formats. Required backend classes include a Wine-compatible Windows runtime, a WinBoat-style Windows environment for applications needing a fuller Windows VM/container context, and an APK/Android compatibility layer for Android applications. Additional compatible backends MAY be registered later through the same framework.
The compatibility manager owns stable entities such as CompatibilityApp, CompatibilityPackage, CompatibilityBackend, CompatibilityEnvironment, CompatibilityRoute, AppRoutingRule, CompatibilityPermissionSet, CompatibilityHealth and CompatibilitySnapshot or equivalent contracts. Applications are identified by stable package/application identity rather than by the pathname of the installer that originally created them.
Automatic package routing
Opening or double-clicking a supported foreign application package MUST route through the compatibility framework automatically. Executable/package type should be determined from trusted file metadata/signature/MIME inspection where available rather than relying only on filename extension.
Windows .exe/.msi and equivalent supported installers are routed to an eligible Windows backend. Android .apk packages are routed to an eligible APK/Android compatibility backend. The normal user experience is Install/Open application, not manually invoking wine, configuring a prefix, running Docker/Podman/QEMU/RDP commands or issuing Android runtime commands in Terminal.
The router evaluates package type, known application identity, architecture, backend capability, existing environments, administrator policy, resource requirements, compatibility knowledge and user defaults. When there is one clear eligible default, routing should proceed without unnecessary questions. When multiple viable frameworks exist or the user requests control, the UI may ask which framework/backend to use.
Per-application framework defaults
Users can set a preferred/default CompatibilityBackend for each installed application or recognised application identity. A chooser can provide an explicit 'Always use this framework for this app' action. This preference is stored against stable app/package identity and survives moves/renames of the original installer.
A per-app default does not override hard incompatibility, missing backend capability, administrator policy or unavailable hardware. If the selected backend cannot satisfy the app, the framework reports why and may offer other eligible backends rather than silently executing through an unrelated path.
Users can change/reset the backend association later from the application's compatibility settings. Global defaults may exist for Windows packages and APK packages, but per-app rules take precedence where valid.
Windows: Wine path
The Wine backend manages Wine runtime/version, isolated prefixes/environments, application architecture, DLL/runtime dependencies, graphics/DirectX translation, environment variables, registry integration, drive mappings, fonts, file associations, launch arguments and per-app overrides through CUI.NET management surfaces.
Ordinary users MUST NOT need to manually run winecfg, winetricks, edit registry state or construct WINEPREFIX environment variables. Advanced views may expose equivalent controls and raw technical details when useful.
Applications SHOULD normally use isolated managed Wine environments so dependency/runtime changes, repair, backup and uninstall do not corrupt unrelated apps. Applications may deliberately share an environment when required, but that relationship must be explicit.
Windows: WinBoat-style environment path
The WinBoat-style backend provides a managed Windows VM/container environment for applications that need or work better with a fuller Windows installation. It may expose configurable CPU, RAM, storage, hardware acceleration, networking, shared folders, USB/device passthrough, graphics configuration and individual-app/RemoteApp-style window integration where supported.
The management experience hides Docker/Podman, QEMU, VM orchestration and RDP implementation details during normal use while retaining advanced diagnostics. Individual Windows applications should appear as normal 9to1-OS windows where technically possible; a full Windows desktop remains available as a fallback/advanced mode.
Android/APK compatibility path
9to1-OS MUST support Android APK applications through the same Compatibility Framework using an Android/APK compatibility layer. Installing an APK creates/registers a normal CompatibilityApp backed by the Android runtime rather than placing Android apps in a disconnected secondary launcher.
The APK backend is responsible for Android runtime/container lifecycle, package installation/update/removal, Android package identity, architecture/ABI compatibility, graphics acceleration, display/window integration, storage mappings, networking, clipboard, audio, microphone/camera, notifications, input, orientation, intents/file associations and other host bridges where supported.
Android applications should participate in Go, taskbar/taskbar layers, window switching, Desktop Spaces, notifications, Files/open-with/share flows, Shelf and other applicable 9to1-OS integrations. The Android compatibility layer MUST NOT require the user to launch a separate Android desktop merely to start an installed APK unless a full Android environment is explicitly requested.
If multiple APK-compatible runtimes/backends are available, the same automatic eligibility and per-app default framework rules apply. The user may choose a backend and persist it for that Android app; otherwise 9to1 selects the highest-priority eligible configured default.
Unified installation experience
Opening a supported .exe, .msi, .apk or other registered foreign package invokes a single compatibility installation flow showing detected application/package identity, recommended backend, destination environment, required permissions, storage/resource estimate and relevant compatibility warnings. Advanced settings expose backend-specific controls without requiring them for a normal install.
The GUI package manager may also install Windows software through Winget or other approved Windows sources and Android packages through approved configured package sources where supported. Package-source discovery does not bypass administrator policy, signing/trust requirements or compatibility permissions.
Native-feeling OS integration
Foreign applications remain subject to the same shell/platform integration expectations as native applications wherever technically possible: Go search/launch, taskbar and layers, Desktop Spaces, snapping, app switching, tray/status integration, Files/open-with, default associations, clipboard, drag/drop, audio/microphone, printing, notifications, shortcuts, recent items, System Log/crash diagnostics and resource management.
Compatibility apps may expose Automations/Dulche actions only through typed supported bridges. Running inside Wine, a Windows VM or an Android runtime does not give an application unrestricted access to the host Automation framework or other 9to1 capabilities.
Filesystem and host permissions
Host folder exposure is explicit and revocable. Compatibility environments receive only user/admin-authorised Files locations rather than unrestricted access to the entire Linux home directory by default. Shared-folder mappings identify the canonical host location and the guest-visible mapping.
Clipboard, microphone, camera, USB/devices, network modes, location and other sensitive bridges use the normal 9to1 permission/policy system where applicable. A locally running foreign application is not automatically trusted with unrestricted host resources.
Graphics, gaming and input
The framework exposes backend-appropriate GPU acceleration, Vulkan/DirectX translation, discrete/integrated GPU preference, fullscreen, controller/input support and relevant compatibility/performance settings. Windows or Android games can integrate with Gaming Desktop Space telemetry/controls where the backend exposes the required data.
Resource and lifecycle management
CompatibilityEnvironment lifecycle states include at least Starting, Running, Suspended, Stopped, Degraded/Error and backend-specific transitional states. The framework reports allocated and actual RAM/CPU/storage/GPU usage where available and participates in 9to1-OS memory/resource policy so idle VM/container environments can be suspended or stopped according to user policy.
Compatibility environments must preserve application/user state safely across suspend/resume and OS memory pressure. The OS MUST NOT simply terminate a managed environment and discard unsaved guest/application state to satisfy a memory target.
Snapshots, repair and updates
Backends supporting snapshots/checkpoints should expose them through the unified manager, particularly before major guest/runtime changes. Compatibility snapshots are separate from 9to1-OS system snapshots.
The framework manages or coordinates updates for Wine/runtime components, WinBoat-derived host integration, Android compatibility/runtime components and guest-integration tooling. Guest Windows/Android update behaviour remains explicit and must not be confused with host OS updates.
Repair/reset operations should be scoped to the selected app/environment and preserve unrelated environments. Destructive reset/uninstall flows explain whether app data, shared environment state or snapshots will be removed.
Diagnostics and recovery
The CUI compatibility manager normalises common failures such as missing Wine dependency, application crash, graphics translation failure, Windows guest boot failure, RemoteApp disconnection, Android runtime failure, incompatible APK ABI, insufficient RAM, unavailable hardware acceleration, broken shared folder or package-install failure into actionable health states.
Advanced diagnostics expose underlying Wine/runtime/VM/RDP/Android logs and environment details through System Log integration. Dulche may analyse these diagnostics and invoke typed repair/configuration APIs but should not replace a supported manager operation with arbitrary host shell automation.
Managed-user policy
Administrator policies can disable foreign-app compatibility entirely, restrict allowed backends, block arbitrary .exe/.msi/.apk installation, allowlist approved applications/package identities, restrict package sources such as Winget/Android sources, constrain host-folder/device/network bridges and lock per-app backend choices.
Launching through Go, Files, Shelf, Terminal, Dulche or another app MUST NOT bypass the same compatibility policy. Policy enforcement occurs in the routing/install/execution broker below the launch surface.
Compatibility Framework acceptance requirements
Double-clicking/opening a supported Windows installer/executable or Android APK automatically enters the unified compatibility routing flow rather than requiring Terminal.
Wine, WinBoat-style Windows environments and APK/Android compatibility are represented as typed backends under one manager.
The user may choose among eligible frameworks and can persist a default framework per application; valid per-app defaults are remembered and editable.
Installed Windows and Android applications integrate with Go, taskbar/window management, Desktop Spaces, Files, notifications, diagnostics and resource policy wherever technically possible.
Host files/devices and sensitive bridges remain explicit permission boundaries, not blanket compatibility-environment access.
Administrator policy applies regardless of which launch surface or compatibility backend is used.
Backend-specific complexity remains available for advanced users but is not required for ordinary installation, launch, repair or troubleshooting.
Pass 2: Terra-form
Pass 2 operating contract
Pass identity and model
Terra-form is the codename for this development pass only. It MUST NOT be interpreted as a model family, capability tier or instruction to use a model named Terra. All Terra-form implementation workers and the coordinator MUST use GPT-6.1 Sol wherever model selection is configurable. The intended execution shape is six parallel implementation workers plus the coordinator unless an external concurrency limit temporarily prevents it.
Hard deadline and outcome
By 21:00 Europe/London on 3 October 2026, the entire 9to1 application and OS MUST be feature-complete against the full active specification including the Terra-form tranche below, integrated, validated against the specification's required acceptance tests, and usable at release-level quality. The deadline does not permit fake implementations, hidden stubs, skipped required tests, weakened permission/security boundaries or silent regressions.
Pre-pass baseline, merge and user test drop
Before Terra-form feature implementation begins, the final accepted Astra la Vista head MUST complete its exact-head acceptance, then be merged into main while preserving history. Do not squash, force-push, destructively reset or discard accepted evidence. The resulting main commit is the Terra-form baseline.
Before the pass begins, build usable test artifacts for every currently shippable 9to1 product or platform target and deliver clearly named copies to the user's local PC. Include a manifest mapping each product to its artifact path, version, exact commit, cryptographic hash, platform/runtime requirements and launch instructions, plus a concise known-limitations record. An artifact that has not passed its required build/launch acceptance MUST be labelled honestly rather than represented as release-ready. User testing and feedback from this drop becomes a priority defect stream during Terra-form.
Scope expansion
All mandatory requirements from the existing specification remain in scope and MUST NOT regress. The previously deferred Files organisation, Link, Prototype, Paths, Replay and Variants tranche below is now mandatory Terra-form scope. There is no generic Future or out-of-scope escape hatch for these named features. Only concepts explicitly left OPEN, such as the separate Playgrounds naming/product question, remain non-committal unless the user explicitly expands scope again.
Implementation and evidence contract
At pass start, regenerate a requirement-by-requirement index from the entire authoritative specification and this Terra-form tranche. Track every requirement as VERIFIED, IMPLEMENTED-UNVERIFIED, MISSING or BLOCKED. A source file, authored test, worker statement or isolated draft does not establish completion. Completed cohorts MUST be integrated continuously through bounded source capture, owning tests, regression/resource/native checks where applicable, accepted-root integration and exact-head CI rather than saved for a final mega-merge.
Where a named Terra-form feature needs a low-level format or interface that is not explicitly specified, choose the narrowest coherent shipping contract consistent with the product behaviour below, document that decision and validate it. An unspecified technical detail is not permission to invent an additional product, weaken canonical ownership/permissions, or defer the named feature to another pass.
Android and Go release rule
Full Android/Go parity remains the target. If time is genuinely critical near the 21:00 deadline, complex newly added Terra-form surfaces MAY temporarily ship on Android/Go as responsive read-only or limited-editing experiences provided their canonical data formats, permissions and navigation remain compatible and all existing Android/Go functionality continues to work. Full authoring parity then continues overnight. This fallback does not apply to existing features that already had stronger mobile requirements.
Release exit gate
Terra-form is complete only when every in-scope feature is implemented and reachable through normal user-facing navigation; no demo-only or stub path stands in for production behaviour; required specification acceptance suites are green; required native, device and provider paths have been exercised; accessibility, performance, reliability, recovery and failure behaviour meet the specification; production authentication/backend integration works; release packages build, install and run cleanly; and the final evidence ledger shows effectively 100% verified coverage. If a genuine external prerequisite prevents one item, isolate and report that blocker explicitly while completing everything else.
Terra-form product and interaction contract
TF-01 — Scope, terminology and ownership
All requirements in this section are active Pass 2 shipping requirements, in addition to the full existing specification and the operating contract above. This is one consolidated specification: product definitions, UI behaviour, data rules, APIs and acceptance criteria below describe the same required implementation. Earlier terminology is not an alternative implementation path.
Files owns ten native organisation types: Folder, Project, Sheet, Tree, Smart, Timeline, Pipeline, Catalogue, Stash and Matrix. They are not ten separate applications. Link owns two authored document types: Flow and Binder. Sheet belongs to Files, not Link. Binder is the interconnected document previously called Flow; Flow now means the continuous reading document defined below. Prototype replaces the proposed name Models. Stash is the ordered collection. Variants is an integrated capability, not an app or Files organisation type. Project retains its Files meaning and MUST NOT silently become a separate Projects app.
Files owns storage, canonical file identity, providers, contextual organisation metadata, sync and filesystem operations. Link, Prototype, Paths and Replay own their respective semantic document/session models. Existing owning apps retain authority over embedded originals and app-specific edits. The distinction MUST be visible in the interface: arranging a file, editing that file, editing an authored block and creating an independent copy are different operations.
The new surfaces MUST reuse CUI, Home services, the Shared Productivity Engine, the registered preview/editor system and the Node Graph Framework for their applicable capabilities. Domain-specific nodes and objects extend those shared contracts; they MUST NOT create competing permission brokers, generic content-merge engines or parallel implementations of the same shared object. Existing donor-backed apps retain their donor-parity requirements. This section does not select an additional donor, paid dependency, external hosting service or overlapping product.
TF-02 — Shared UI, navigation and authoring behaviour
Link, Prototype, Paths and Replay MUST have functional launch screens: New, Open/import, Recent, Pinned, Shared with Me and search, backed by real artifacts and permissions. Link offers New Flow and New Binder; Prototype offers New Prototype; Paths offers New Path; Replay offers New capture and Open Replay. Templates use the existing template registry when compatible templates are available; an empty registry shows an honest empty state, not fictitious sample projects. Opening a specific artifact bypasses the launch screen. Returning Home MUST preserve saved work and session state.
Each editor MUST have a clear title/location area, save/sync state, history access, share controls and an explicit distinction between authoring and viewing/running. Use a compact contextual command bar, a central work area, a collapsible navigation/outline or asset panel where required below, and an inspector for the current selection. Tools belong near the relevant work, not in a permanent wall of unrelated forms. Panels MUST be resizable or collapsible, preserve useful user preferences and leave a usable work area at smaller sizes. A Properties panel MUST not be the only way to perform ordinary creation, navigation or editing.
Use the existing CUI typography, theme tokens, spacing, focus, menus, dialogs, tooltips, icons and persistent contextual AI bar. Labels MUST use the names in TF-01. Theme changes, reduced motion, contrast settings and scaling MUST apply to the actual editor, embedded content chrome and pop-ups. Product controls MUST not expose development jargon such as raw schema IDs, worker status or implementation notes as their ordinary labels. IDs and diagnostics belong in details/developer surfaces.
Pointer selection, multiple selection, keyboard focus, context menus, clipboard operations, undo/redo, rename and delete MUST follow the owning app and shared engine conventions. Provide visible menu/button alternatives to drag-only, hover-only and shortcut-only actions. Text-entry focus MUST prevent a canvas shortcut from deleting an object or moving the viewport while the user is typing. Selection and contextual toolbars MUST identify the active object and the scope of the next action.
Spatial surfaces MUST provide pan, zoom, fit-to-content, fit-to-selection and an accessible outline/list alternative. They MUST distinguish moving an item from panning the surface and selecting an object from opening it. Authoring mode supports selection handles and explicit Open/Edit actions; reader mode allows direct activation of openable items. Touch input MUST distinguish tap, long-press and drag, and provide a visible alternative to context menus. Moving between an overview, a child container and a document MUST preserve the relevant selection, scroll/zoom position and navigation history.
Inline and pop-up editors MUST visibly identify the source document and whether edits affect the original. Pop-ups require a title, Close, Open in owning app and permission/save state, plus Back or breadcrumbs when navigating within a nested container. Closing returns focus and the surrounding view to the originating item. Escape closes the innermost dismissible surface, not an unrelated outer editor; modal surfaces use the shared focus/inert contract. Dismissal MUST NOT discard uncommitted edits. Where a full-screen mobile view replaces a desktop pop-up, Back returns to the same contextual location.
All surfaces MUST distinguish Loading, Empty, No matching results, Read-only, Offline/unavailable, Permission denied, Unsupported capability, Missing source, Saving, Saved, Unsynced changes and Conflict where applicable. An empty state provides the relevant first action. A failed operation keeps the existing work intact, identifies the affected item and offers an appropriate retry, resolve or return action. A loading placeholder MUST NOT replace a recoverable draft or falsely represent an empty document.
TF-03 — Common data, source references and recovery
Every organisation object, document, authored block, placement, relationship, section, step, event, checkpoint and variant MUST have stable identity at its owning scope. Names, row positions, coordinates and file paths MUST NOT be identity keys. Persist content/layout separately from per-user viewport, panel state and reading position. Format/schema versions, current/base revision, owner, storage location and permission references MUST survive save, reopen, sync and export/import through the supported native route.
A source reference MUST identify the canonical file/artifact, owning app, optional stable sub-object/section selector and revision policy. Ordinary references follow the current authorised source by default; an explicitly pinned revision and every Replay checkpoint identify a specific historical revision. Repeated appearances MAY have different local layout or labels while referring to the same original. Renaming or moving a source MUST NOT detach references. Deleting a selected source section produces a visible missing-section state; the app MUST NOT silently substitute the whole document or a different section.
Access to a container or composed document MUST NOT grant access to its sources. Recheck source permissions when resolving previews, opening, editing, exporting, sharing, searching and providing AI context. Inaccessible references appear as locked/redacted placeholders without leaking prohibited names, thumbnails, counts or content. Missing, offline and denied states MUST remain distinguishable only to the extent the caller is entitled to know them. A share dialog MUST explain that referenced originals may require separate access; changing their grants is a separate explicit action.
Removing an appearance, connection or authored block removes that contextual object only. Deleting an original invokes the owning Files/app operation and its confirmation, Trash and recovery rules. Duplicating a placement or composed document preserves references by default; duplicating source content requires a separately labelled Make independent copy action, appropriate rights and an explicit destination. The UI MUST preview the difference before a consequential operation. Undo/redo MUST act on the same semantic operation and respect current revisions; it MUST NOT reverse unrelated collaborators' changes.
Mutations MUST be validated and committed atomically at the smallest user-visible boundary using stable operation identity and expected/base revisions. Real-time updates and offline journals inherit the existing Files and owning-app contracts. Concurrent incompatible edits produce recoverable conflicts, not silent last-write-wins. Invalid edits preserve the last valid state and the recoverable draft. Save failure MUST remain visible until durability is established. Content and referenced assets MUST not be evicted while they are the only unsynced copy.
Native export/import MUST preserve the organisation/document structure, supported authored objects, reference identities, revision policies and required dependency manifest. References are not silently flattened or copied. Portable exports that include source bytes require the source's export/copy permissions and MUST explain the resulting independent disclosure. Unsupported/missing dependencies remain explicit. Import validates schemas, quotas, references and permissions before commit and resolves identity collisions without overwriting existing artifacts. Static export is separately labelled and MUST disclose lost interaction; it is never a substitute for the native artifact.
Files — native organisation types
TF-F01 — Shared Files organisation shell and operations
The existing donor-parity Files sidebar, tabs, Back/Forward, breadcrumbs/address bar, toolbar, selection, previews, location management and grid/list/details views remain the shell. The New menu MUST expose the ten organisation types at compatible locations, alongside existing native document creation. Creation asks for type, name and storage/backing location, then opens an immediately usable empty organisation. A provider lacking native metadata MAY use the existing Files-owned metadata capability; unsupported storage or write permissions MUST be explained before creation rather than falling back to an ordinary folder without consent.
Every non-Folder type is a first-class versioned Files organisation object with a stable Files item identity, type, storage location, settings and local membership/layout records. A membership records its stable membership/placement ID, target FileID/FolderID or organisation ID and any type-specific section/stage/cell/order data. Contextual membership is not a second filesystem parent. New files created from a virtual view use an explicit Files destination, initially the organisation's configured backing location; the location MUST be inspectable/changeable before creation. The owning app creates the file, and Files then adds its appearance. An external file is imported through the normal transfer flow before a new managed reference is committed.
Organisation commands MUST include Add existing, New item, Rename, Open, Open in new tab/window, Show original location, Properties, Share, view/layout settings, Remove from this organisation and the separately labelled original-file delete action when permitted. Supported bulk actions show the selected scope and partial-success results. Dragging an existing item into a contextual collection adds a reference by default; the drop indicator MUST state Add reference, Move original, Copy original or Reorder as appropriate. The default MUST NOT unexpectedly move or duplicate source bytes.
All organisation types MUST support nesting with every other type, including ordinary folders, subject only to explicit provider capabilities and coherent containment rules. Nested organisation objects are openable as units, not flattened into their parents. Owned containment MUST be acyclic; reference resolution MUST detect recursion and avoid infinite expansion. Smart query results MUST not recursively ingest their own collection. A relationship that cannot be represented safely is rejected with its reason and an alternative, not silently converted to a different type.
A normal folder-style contents view MUST be available for every specialised type without converting its data. Changing the view does not erase sections, coordinates, relationships, filters, stages, metadata or ordering. View choice and viewport are per-user preferences; authored layout and collection settings are shared document state. Tree retains its stricter editor-only visual mode. Breadcrumbs MUST distinguish a contextual section/group from an actual filesystem folder, and Show original location MUST resolve the canonical storage location.
TF-F02 — Folder
Folder remains an ordinary filesystem/location hierarchy with its existing donor behaviours, sorting, grouping, views, folder colours, navigation, permissions and file operations. The new organisation types MUST NOT reinterpret existing folders, add mandatory grouping metadata or replace normal move/copy semantics. Files can store a new organisation object within a folder, and a contextual collection can reference a folder without creating a second physical parent.
Folder acceptance MUST verify ordinary create, rename, move, copy, delete/restore, colour, sort and nested navigation before and after adding organisation objects. A normal folder opened from a Project, Tree or Matrix MUST still behave as a folder, and returning to the parent context MUST restore that view without moving the folder.
TF-F03 — Project
Project is a folder-like view divided into visible named sections on the same page. For example, Homework shows Maths containing Mathshomework.pptx and Mathshomework2.pptx, and French containing Frenchlistening.docx. A Maths folder containing its own homework remains possible. Sections are not subfolders and assigning an item to a section MUST NOT change its underlying Files location.
The main view MUST show each section's title, authorised item count, collapse control, contextual menu and Add item entry point. A section contains the selected grid/list/details representation of its members. The toolbar provides Add section, Add existing, New item and view/sort controls. Sections support create, rename, reorder, collapse/expand, colour/label customisation through shared presentation controls and delete. A searchable section outline provides direct navigation for large Projects without forcing the user to open every section as a new page.
Each section has a persistent SectionID and addressable deep link. Moving an appearance between sections updates that membership only; source rename/edit actions remain visibly separate. New unassigned members appear in an Unsectioned area. Removing a section MUST offer to keep its members in Unsectioned or remove those appearances; neither option deletes originals. Sorting items within one section MUST not reorder the other sections unless the user applies a Project-wide sort. Per-user collapse state MUST not rewrite shared ordering.
Project acceptance MUST create the Homework example, add a nested folder and another organisation type, reorder and rename sections, follow a SectionID link after rename, move an appearance and delete a section while retaining originals. Reopen and a second authorised client MUST preserve authored section order/membership; viewer mode MUST allow reading and navigation without showing usable mutation controls.
TF-F04 — Sheet
Sheet is a Files-owned whiteboard-like workspace for arranging separate files and ideas. The canvas MUST support file/folder/organisation appearances, sticky notes, rich text, images, labelled connections, freehand drawing and shapes. These surrounding objects supply context; placing a file does not merge its contents into a new document. A Sheet can contain another Sheet, a Stash or a Link document as an openable item without spreading its contents over the parent canvas.
The editor MUST provide Select, Pan, Add files, Text, Sticky note, Image, Shape, Pen, Eraser and Connector tools. A contextual inspector exposes supported appearance, fill/stroke, text style, dimensions, position, layering and link/target properties. Multi-selection supports move, resize where compatible, align/distribute, group/ungroup, duplicate appearance and remove. Snap/grid controls, zoom, fit and an object outline MUST be available. Connectors attach to stable object IDs rather than being abandoned when an item moves; deleting a connected object previews and removes its affected contextual connections, not its source file.
File appearances MUST show a useful permission-safe name/type/preview and an identifiable open action. Each Sheet has a persisted File opening setting: Pop-up or Owning app, with Pop-up as the initial setting for a new Sheet. An item's explicit context command can choose the other route for that opening without silently changing the Sheet default. In authoring mode a click selects and the explicit Open action or normal activation gesture opens; in view mode activation opens directly. Pop-up editing uses only a safe registered owning editor and MUST identify that it changes the original; otherwise provide a read-only preview and Open in owning app.
Persist ObjectID/PlacementID, source reference, geometry, z-order, grouping, notes, drawing strokes, shape properties, connector endpoints and opening policy. Viewport and selection remain per-user. Moving or deleting a file appearance MUST not alter an unrelated appearance in another Sheet, while editing the canonical file MUST update every authorised live reference. Undo for local geometry MUST not roll back source edits performed through a different editor.
Sheet acceptance MUST combine a Write file, image, sticky note, labelled connection, freehand stroke, shape and nested Stash; arrange and group them; open and edit the same original from two contexts; close the preview and recover the prior canvas position; switch opening policy; and save/reopen with identical authored layout. Keyboard and touch users MUST be able to create, select, open and reposition items without precise pointer dragging.
TF-F05 — Tree
Tree is a structured Sheet connecting related files and groups. An editor can create a Maths group linked to Maths.pptx, Maths2.pptx and Algebra.pptx; activating Maths opens a pop-up containing its related contents and folders. The same actual file can appear in multiple Trees without unmanaged copies or separately created shortcut files. Tree relationship changes affect the Tree; source edits affect the shared original.
Editors MUST see a Tree / View switch. Tree provides a connected layout with Add group, Add existing, Connect, Disconnect, arrange, expand/collapse and fit controls, plus a searchable outline and a selected-node inspector. Nodes display accessible names and authorised previews/counts. Connections, parent/group relationships and collapsed branches MUST be explicit. Reparenting MUST preview its structural effect; a cycle is rejected. Changing arrangement MUST not change logical relationships or file identity.
View presents the contents using ordinary folder-style browsing. View-only users MUST receive View, not a disabled visual Tree. They can open authorised groups/files and navigate Back, but MUST NOT obtain the protected visual layout through a hidden route, embed or layout API. An editor switching to View sees the same accessible logical contents. Editing permission on the Tree does not imply edit permission on its referenced files, and source permissions remain independently checked.
Persist stable GroupID/NodeID/ConnectionID, memberships, hierarchy and authored layout. Removing a group or node MUST show whether children are being retained/reassigned or appearances removed and MUST never delete originals as an incidental graph operation. Tree acceptance MUST verify the Maths journey, one file in two Trees, rename/move stability, cycle rejection, editor/viewer mode differences, nested folders and no protected-layout leakage through APIs or Boards embeds.
TF-F06 — Smart
Smart is a rule-based collection of canonical originals from explicitly selected locations. The editor MUST show a readable rule builder, location/scope picker, All/Any condition grouping, supported operators and a live result preview. Required filter fields include tags, file type, work status and modification date where the source supplies them. Values that are unavailable MUST be treated as unknown, not silently replaced with false, zero or an empty string.
The command bar provides Edit rules, Add location, Refresh/reconcile, Pin item and view/sort controls. Each result exposes Why included, identifying the matching rule or manual pin. Pinned exceptions remain visible even when they stop matching; unpinning returns the item to rule-driven membership. Removing a dynamically matched appearance MUST explain that it will return while it matches and direct the user to adjust the rule or scope rather than pretending the source was removed from the collection. Original-file delete remains separate.
Optional AI setup converts a request into proposed visible rules and locations for review. It MUST not run an opaque classifier as the only explanation for membership or search private locations without permission. Membership updates use the Files change/index contracts, with visible freshness and partial/unavailable-provider state. A disconnected provider MUST NOT make its missing results look like confirmed non-matches. Nested organisations can be matched or pinned as whole objects under TF-F01.
Persist the versioned rule expression, selected location IDs, recursion policy, pins and view settings; cached results are not authoritative copies. Smart acceptance MUST demonstrate entry/exit after tag and date changes, All/Any conditions, a pinned non-match, a newly inaccessible location, an offline result set and an inspectable AI-generated rule proposal. No match operation may move, duplicate or widen access to an original.
TF-F07 — Timeline
Timeline positions files and nested groups along a chronology. The main surface MUST provide a labelled time axis, zoom between broad periods and individual dates, pan, date navigation, fit, an Undated area and a visible Date source selector: Created, Modified, Deadline or Assigned. Labelled periods can contain material and open their contents in a pop-up. A date range is drawn as a span rather than forced into a single point.
The inspector MUST show the effective date/range, source of that value, relevant timezone/date-only interpretation and any locally assigned value. Users can add, rename, resize and reorder labelled periods, open an item/group and filter the displayed contents. Dragging a file to change its chronological position is available for Assigned dates and changes Timeline-local data. Under Created/Modified/Deadline, the UI MUST explain the source rather than secretly rewrite it; explicitly editing a writable source date invokes its owning operation with permission and impact checks.
Files with no value for the selected date source remain in Undated. Overlapping items MUST remain discoverable through stacking/grouping, previews and the folder-style alternative. Live source-date changes reposition the appearance without changing the file's identity. Changing the selected date source MUST preserve authored assigned dates and periods for later reuse instead of deleting them.
Persist DateSource, assigned start/end values, period IDs/ranges, memberships and display settings. Timeline acceptance MUST cover all four date-source choices, an ongoing range, an undated file, overlapping files, a nested organisation, a period pop-up, timezone/date-only boundaries and a source modification that updates the view without rewriting unrelated dates.
TF-F08 — Pipeline
Pipeline represents progression through configurable stages, not a Project's static categories. The main view MUST show horizontally arranged stage columns, accessible stage titles/counts, item previews, Add stage and Add item. A compact list/grouped view remains available. Users can create, rename, reorder and remove stages, move appearances between stages and inspect an item's contextual process history without opening its source document.
The stage editor MUST support optional checklist requirements and reviewer approval. New personal Pipelines begin without mandatory gates. A transition preview identifies unmet requirements, approval status and any explicit shared-metadata mapping. An unmet mandatory gate blocks the transition with its reason; a request for reviewer approval becomes visibly pending and does not masquerade as a completed stage move. Reviewer identity and authority MUST be checked. Dragging, the Move to stage command and APIs enforce the same gates and revision checks.
Each membership has a stable EntryID and local StageID, order, checklist state and approval/transition records. Pipeline stage state is local to that Pipeline by default. A Mapping control may explicitly connect a selected field/stage to global file metadata, showing the target field, conversion, affected items, required rights and conflict behaviour before activation. No implicit mapping occurs. If the global update cannot be authorised or committed, the transition remains blocked or reports an explicitly declared partial result; it MUST not silently claim both succeeded.
Deleting a stage MUST require a destination for retained entries or explicit removal of appearances. Originals are unchanged. Pipeline acceptance MUST move an item by pointer, keyboard and API; reject an unmet checklist; obtain and revoke an authorised approval; handle a simultaneous transition; and prove that a stage change in one Pipeline does not change another Pipeline or source metadata without an explicit mapping.
TF-F09 — Catalogue
Catalogue is a file-centred collection with structured information attached to entries. It MUST provide Cards, Table and Grouped views, a field editor, sort/filter/group controls and an information panel that opens without launching the full source document. The file itself is the organised item; typing a filename into a disconnected table cell MUST NOT create a valid source reference.
Required configurable field kinds include text/description, person/owner reference, status/select, tags, date, number and rating. Each field declares its stable FieldID, type, source and validation. The UI MUST distinguish source metadata from Catalogue-local fields, and read-only source values from writable ones. Editing local notes or ratings MUST not alter another Catalogue. Editing an exposed global field invokes its actual owning operation and shows that broader scope. Changing a field type MUST preview incompatible values and preserve them until an explicit conversion is confirmed.
The entry panel MUST show the authorised source identity/location, available metadata, local values, Open, Show original location and Remove from Catalogue. Users can add/reorder/hide fields, resize columns, choose card preview fields, group results and edit compatible selections in bulk. Validation errors stay attached to the affected field/entry without dropping the rest of the user's edit. Removing a field previews affected local values and is recoverable through normal history; it does not delete source properties.
Persist EntryID-to-source mappings, the field schema, local values and authored view configuration. Catalogue acceptance MUST use the same file in two Catalogues with different local notes, change a true global property visibly, reject an invalid field value, preserve values during type changes, open the information panel in all views and retain canonical identity after source rename.
TF-F10 — Stash
Stash is a deliberately ordered collection for working through separate files one at a time. Its reader MUST show the current item, its position in the sequence, Previous/Next, an overview/filmstrip, Open in owning app and an optional Reviewed control. Keyboard and touch navigation MUST work. The sequence is persistent authored data, not an incidental filename sort, and files remain separate rather than forming Flow's continuous page.
Editors can add, remove and reorder entries through the overview, using drag and explicit Move earlier/later commands. A Compare action opens two selected entries side by side with independent source identity and navigation; changing one comparison slot MUST not silently advance the main reading position. On narrow screens comparison may switch between clearly labelled A/B views while retaining both selected entries. A Stash opened from a Sheet remains one contextual surface rather than expanding every entry onto the canvas.
Persist stable EntryIDs and sequence order. Reading position and optional reviewed state are per user, keyed to EntryID rather than numeric position, and survive restart. Reordering MUST retain the reader's current item when it still exists. Removing that entry moves to a clearly identified neighbouring position without deleting its original. The UI MUST distinguish Complete/reviewed status from actually changing a file's global work status.
Stash acceptance MUST save a non-alphabetical sequence, reopen at the same item, mark reviewed items, reorder from another authorised client, compare two files, handle a denied/missing source and return from a Sheet pop-up without changing the canvas or cloning files.
TF-F11 — Matrix
Matrix organises material by two authored dimensions. The main view MUST display user-defined row and column headings together, with sticky headings or an equivalent persistent orientation aid, cell counts/previews, Add row, Add column and view/zoom controls. Each intersection contains file/folder/organisation appearances. Users can open a cell group, a row's combined contents or a column's combined contents without traversing an invented outer-folder hierarchy.
Rows and columns support create, rename, reorder and remove. Each has a stable ID; a CellID is tied to those identities, not its visual coordinates or labels. Dragging an appearance between cells changes Matrix-local classification only. Keyboard navigation MUST identify the current row/column and provide explicit move/add/open commands. Large grids MUST remain navigable using filtering, scrolling and the normal contents view rather than shrinking every cell until its contents are unreadable.
Removing an axis previews the affected memberships and offers reassignment, retention in an Unassigned group or removal of appearances; it MUST not delete originals. A row/column combined view MUST not suggest that repeated appearances are independent copies: repeated canonical items are coalesced with visible placement context or clearly marked as repeated references. The authorised counts MUST correspond to the chosen displayed unit, not include hidden private entries.
Matrix acceptance MUST build Topic A/B/C rows and Writing/Data/Presentations columns, populate a cell with a nested folder, open cell/row/column groups, rename/reorder both axes, move an appearance, remove an axis safely and reopen without losing identity, classification or readable orientation.
Link
TF-L01 — Link shell, documents and shared content
Link connects work together through Flow and Binder. The launch screen and New menu MUST distinguish them by both name and preview: Flow is a continuous page; Binder is an explorable interconnected document. Creating a document asks for its type, name and Files destination. A document can itself be placed in any compatible Files organisation, opened from Spaces or included in Boards without changing its identity. Link MUST NOT offer Sheet as a third document type or use Boards as the name of Binder.
The editor MUST expose the current document type, outline/search, Insert, source management, preview/view mode, undo/redo, save/sync/history and sharing. Link-authored text, tables, images, media, drawings and other supported objects use the Shared Productivity Engine. Embedded originals use registered owning-app renderers/editors. A Sources panel lists authorised references, live/pinned policy, selected source section, availability and permission status, with Reveal placement, Change source/section and Open original actions.
Link owns its block/container structure, arrangement and directly authored information. Existing files stay independent originals. Authoring a note inside Binder does not require creating a new file; placing a Write document inside Binder does not silently import its text as Binder-owned content. The distinction MUST be visible in the inspector and destructive-action wording. Duplicate document copies its authored structure and preserves source references unless the user explicitly chooses independent source copies.
TF-L02 — Flow reading and authoring UI
Flow MUST render selected documents and other content inline in one chosen reading order, with one primary vertical scroll. It MUST not be a column of file icons, buttons to open pop-ups or permanently nested vertically scrolling document panels. The content width, typography integration and transitions MUST form a coherent page while preserving the owning source's meaningful content. Large tables may use local horizontal navigation; interactive media can retain their own controls, but normal document reading MUST remain continuous.
The author MUST have a reorderable block outline and an insertion affordance between blocks. Insert supports authorised whole documents or stable source sections, directly authored shared objects, images/media and a scoped report assistant. Each selected block shows Move, Duplicate placement, Remove, source/section selection and supported layout controls. Reordering by drag or outline commands changes only the Flow sequence. Duplicate placement can show the same original at a second point without cloning it. Source labels/chrome MUST be available on focus/selection or through the Sources panel without making the reading surface resemble a file-manager grid.
The Annual report example is mandatory: Report.data, then Report.write, then an image, then another authorised section/appearance of Report.data, then an AI assistant for questions about the report. Readers scroll through all contributions as one page. The assistant's context is the report and its authorised sources; it cannot silently search unrelated work or reveal a source the reader cannot access. AI unavailability MUST not block reading the report.
A live source change MUST update the correct block while preserving the reader's stable location as far as the underlying content permits. Explicit revision pinning MUST be visible. Missing sections, unsupported renderers, offline sources and denied access get bounded, accurately labelled placeholders without erasing the block or substituting another source. Navigation back from an original editor MUST return to the corresponding Flow position. Large documents use incremental layout/virtualisation without changing source identity or making the scrollbar repeatedly jump during ordinary reading.
Inline viewing is required for supported sources. Inline editing is available only through a safe registered owning editor, with an explicit Edit original state and ordinary source permissions, revision checks and audit. A reader with edit rights to Flow but not its source can rearrange the reference where permitted but cannot edit that source. Where embedded editing is unavailable, provide faithful read-only inline content plus Open in owning app; do not flatten, fork or invent a private editor. Formatting a Flow-owned heading MUST not unexpectedly restyle a source document.
Flow acceptance MUST build the Annual report example; use the same Data source twice with stable section selectors; edit the original through a permitted route; revoke source access; delete a referenced section; reorder and undo; reopen and resume reading; and verify a continuous primary scroll on desktop and mobile. No source copy or widened permission may be introduced by composition.
TF-L03 — Binder overview, containers and navigation
Binder is one authored interconnected document with an overview and layers of detail: one file, connected ideas, and explorable contents. Its authoring surface MUST be a freeform overview containing clickable notes, cards, physical-style folders, binders, tabs, stacks and connected sections. These are real authored document containers with nested content, not ordinary filesystem folders with decorative styling and not merely shortcuts to other files.
The palette MUST provide note/card, folder, tabbed binder, stack, section/connection and supported shared content objects. Authors can place, resize, group, layer and label objects, create/reorder tabs and stack contents, connect stable items and edit a selected container's contents. The inspector exposes title, accessible label, appearance, target/open behaviour and relevant container settings. The hierarchy/outline is searchable and supports the same add, rename, move, reorder and open operations without relying on spatial precision.
Opening a folder reveals its contained material. Opening a tabbed binder exposes named section tabs and the selected section. A stack exposes its ordered contents. A card or note can reveal writing, images, tables, audio and other supported material authored directly in Binder or referenced from an original. Containers can nest under the shared recursion safeguards. Visual physical metaphors MUST not conceal controls or require ornamental animations to finish before the content is usable; reduced motion preserves the same navigation.
Reader mode hides layout handles and authoring chrome while retaining accessible openable items, connections, breadcrumbs/Back, Close and search/outline. Closing a detail view returns to the same surrounding overview and focus. A stable item deep link opens the corresponding detail and a route back to its context. Readers choose what to explore; Binder MUST NOT force a fixed sequence or masquerade as a Paths progression system. Connections are navigation links between related parts, not an obligation to turn the document into a flowchart.
Persist stable object/container/section/tab/connection IDs, nested authored content, geometry, source references and intended overview. Reader viewport, currently open containers and selected tabs are per-user session state unless the author explicitly sets a default starting view. Deleting a Binder container previews its authored descendants; separately referenced files remain intact. Extracting authored content into another app requires an explicit owning-app create/export operation, not an implicit file for every note.
Binder acceptance MUST author a folder with rich content, a tabbed binder, a stack, a referenced original and a connection; read them in a non-linear order; close back to the same overview; find an off-canvas item through the outline; follow a deep link after rename; and open the Binder from a Sheet and as a Boards page. Directly authored information, source references and all nested content MUST survive reopen without being flattened or split into unwanted files.
Prototype
TF-P01 — Product boundary and editor layout
Prototype creates editable interactive systems: objects with typed properties, formulas, rules, relationships, adjustable inputs and visible outputs. Its scope includes simulations, calculations, interactive explanations and experimental tools, not only software-interface mock-ups or 3D geometry. It MUST be useful without AI and MUST NOT be renamed Models in menus, artifact types or launch screens.
The editor MUST provide a component/object library, an object hierarchy, a central Design surface, a Logic/relationships surface, a contextual property inspector and a Run/Preview surface. Users MUST be able to switch between Design, Logic and Run without losing work or creating separate copies of the model. A collapsible diagnostics area shows validation, formula errors and runtime problems with links to the responsible object/property. The contextual AI bar shares the selected model/object scope rather than creating an unrelated chat-only prototype.
The component library MUST include text/value outputs, numeric and text inputs, sliders, switches, buttons, selectors, tables/charts and reusable containers/components. The Design surface supports placement, size, grouping and shared layout controls. The inspector exposes accessible label, property type, default/current value, limits/options, units where declared, binding and event actions. Controls MUST be backed by typed properties and real behaviour; a visually plausible slider disconnected from the model is not implemented functionality.
TF-P02 — Typed model, logic and execution
The canonical model MUST contain versioned stable object/property/component/relationship/event/action IDs, types, defaults, constraints, formulas, dependency references, layout, assets and saved authoring revision. Bindings target stable identities rather than display labels. The Logic surface uses the shared Node Graph Framework for applicable typed ports, connections, comments/groups, pan/zoom, keyboard editing, validation and execution overlays. A readable formula editor remains available for expressions that are clearer as formulas than as large graphs.
Authors can create typed properties, bind controls to them, define formulas, connect object relationships, add events/actions and compose reusable components with explicit inputs/outputs. Numeric, Boolean, text and structured/list values MUST be distinguishable. Incompatible assignments/connections are rejected or require an explicit conversion. Renaming a property MUST not break its bindings. Removing one previews dependent formulas and controls and requires repair or an explicit unresolved state rather than quietly replacing references with zero.
Derived calculations MUST follow validated dependencies. Circular combinational dependencies, invalid types, division/domain errors and unavailable inputs MUST be surfaced at their actual source, not hidden as plausible values. Simulations that require feedback MUST use explicit state/time-step semantics rather than relying on an uncontrolled formula cycle. Evaluation MUST have bounded resource use, cancellation and inspectable diagnostics. Long-running calculation MUST not block navigation or Stop.
Run/Preview shows the interactive output with Play/Run, Pause/Stop where time-based execution applies, Reset and inspectable current input/output values. Runtime experimentation MUST be separate from saved authoring defaults: moving a slider during a viewer session changes that session, not every reader's shared model. An editor can explicitly apply chosen inputs as new defaults. Reset restores the declared initial state; reopening an authored model MUST not silently resume unintended external actions. Controlled calculations with the same revision and inputs MUST behave consistently; nondeterministic inputs and random seeds MUST be declared when used.
TF-P03 — Safety, reuse and acceptance
Expressions and scripts MUST execute in the declared sandbox, not arbitrary host code. No file, network, credential, process or device access is implicitly granted by opening or running a Prototype. External actions, when supported, go through existing typed app APIs and Home permissions, with visible effects and cancellation rules. Reader preview MUST not execute consequential actions solely because an author embedded them. The model MUST remain inspectable when execution is blocked.
Measured/imported values, assumptions, calculations and outputs MUST be identifiable in the inspector and relevant output presentation. Units and declared limitations MUST be preserved. AI-generated assumptions MUST not be presented as measurements or validated predictions. AI edits are reviewable typed model operations with normal undo, validation and source permissions. Reusable components retain stable definitions and explicit dependency versions; a component update MUST not silently break existing instances.
Prototype integrates with Files, Spaces, Link, Boards and Paths through registered renderers, references and typed actions. A reader may adjust permitted local inputs without acquiring authoring rights. Native export/import preserves the model and declared dependencies; static output exports are labelled as non-interactive. Missing components keep their payload and show a repair state rather than disappearing.
Prototype acceptance MUST build a working calculator with two inputs, a typed formula and output; build a bounded time-based example with Run/Pause/Reset; bind a slider and switch; display a chart; reuse a component; reject invalid types and a dependency cycle; change inputs without changing saved defaults; recover from a runtime error; and prove that an untrusted script cannot reach host files or network without an authorised capability. Save/reopen and API-driven edits MUST preserve the same model and behaviour.
Paths
TF-H01 — Authoring, steps and route UI
Paths authors guided, repeatable interactive experiences with steps, choices, activities, checkpoints and branching routes. It is not a fixed presentation, an open-ended Binder overview or a sequence improvised afresh by AI. A Path may provide a guided process, exploration route or overview towards an outcome, with the available routes determined by its authored structure.
The authoring editor MUST provide a step library/outline, a route graph, a selected-step content editor, a condition/action inspector and Preview/Test. Add step offers information, choice, activity, checkpoint and outcome/end behaviour through typed step definitions. Steps can contain supported shared content and authorised embedded artifacts. Authors can reorder outline entries, connect or disconnect routes, label choices, designate the starting step, edit conditions, add checkpoints and define explicit completion outcomes. Graph position is not route identity or step order.
Each choice MUST have a human-readable label and stable target. Conditional routing MUST expose its condition, required values and fallback/error behaviour. No eligible route MUST show a recoverable blocked state rather than select a random next step. Multiple eligible automatic routes require an explicit authored priority/selection rule and MUST not depend on incidental storage order. Deliberate loops/retries are allowed when explicitly authored and controllable; accidental automatic loops, missing targets and unreachable required outcomes MUST be detected in validation.
Preview/Test MUST run against an identified draft revision with disposable test progress, offer reset and route inspection, and show the choice/condition responsible for each transition. Authors MUST be able to test alternative inputs and inspect unreachable/missing routes without modifying real users' progress. Updating the shared authored Path uses a deliberate validated revision commit; a preview session is not automatically the published reader revision.
TF-H02 — Reader experience and durable progress
The reader surface MUST show the current step, its content, available choices/actions, relevant checkpoint/completion status and a route/overview affordance when allowed by the authored Path. Continue appears only when its conditions are satisfied. Back/previous navigation, where permitted, MUST not repeat external side effects or silently clear completed work. Branch-dependent length MUST not be presented as a fictitious fixed percentage; show meaningful visited/checkpoint status instead.
Progress MUST be durable and separate from authored content, with stable PathID, authored RevisionID, UserID or clearly scoped guest-session identity, AttemptID, current StepID, visited route, responses, checkpoint states, completion outcome and timestamps. A signed-in reader can resume their authorised attempt after restart or on another compatible device. Guest/local-only progress MUST be labelled honestly and MUST NOT be represented as cross-device account sync.
Readers can restart/reset and complete the same Path more than once. Restart creates a new attempt with clean progress while preserving previous completed attempts under the declared retention policy. Clearing saved progress is a separate confirmed deletion operation. Checkpoints persist sufficient state for safe resume. An interrupted save or duplicate transition request MUST not create duplicate completions or repeat an externally consequential action. Sensitive responses and progress are not automatically exposed to every person who can read the authored Path.
Active attempts remain bound to their authored revision by default. When a newer revision is available, the reader MUST be told; switching/restarting requires an explicit action and a validated mapping or fresh attempt. Deleted/changed steps MUST not cause silent jumps into a different route. Opening an embedded file or Prototype obeys its own permissions, and completion MUST depend on an explicit typed result, not a fragile guess from visible pixels.
TF-H03 — Integration and acceptance
Paths owns step/route semantics and progress. Its graph reuses the shared graph editor, and embedded content reuses the shared object/owning-app systems. Activities that call another app or Automation remain subject to the user's actual permissions and the action's risk; a teacher/author cannot grant those rights merely by embedding the activity. AI can help author or explain a Path through typed operations but MUST not silently replace committed routing during a reader attempt.
Paths acceptance MUST create a branching experience with two outcomes, a required activity and checkpoint; preview both routes; detect a missing target and an automatic loop; resume a real attempt after restart; complete it twice with separate AttemptIDs; update the authored revision without corrupting an existing attempt; revoke a source permission; and prove that retrying a transition does not repeat an external action. Keyboard, screen-reader and narrow-screen users MUST be able to complete the same authored route.
Replay
TF-R01 — Explicit capture and source selection
Replay creates explorable records of how selected work developed. Its core model is semantic revisions, events, work states and checkpoints, not a raw screen recording. Optional screenshots, video and narration may accompany that record. Capture MUST be explicitly started and limited to the selected authorised sources; opening Replay MUST NOT begin recording unrelated work or private activity.
New capture MUST present a source picker, selected files/sub-objects, available capture capabilities per owning app, destination, retention/export implications and optional media settings. Unsupported semantic sources are identified before starting; the UI MUST not silently claim semantic capture when it can only obtain an image. Optional microphone/camera/screen access requires its own explicit selection and platform permissions. A preview of the scope MUST be available before Start.
During capture, show an unmistakable Recording/Paused state, selected-source summary, elapsed session information, Add checkpoint, annotation/narration controls and Pause/Stop. A source-scope change is explicit and timestamped. Stop MUST stop subscriptions and selected media capture, finalise durable state and show any pending/failed material. Losing permission to a source MUST stop future capture for that source and expose the limitation rather than continue through a cached unrestricted channel.
TF-R02 — Semantic timeline and playback UI
The editor/player MUST provide a chronological event/checkpoint timeline, source tracks/filtering, a central historical artifact viewer, a checkpoint/annotation list and an inspector showing the selected source revision and capture completeness. Users can label/reorder presentation chapters where supported without falsifying the underlying event order, add explanations and choose a shareable presentation range. Changes to Replay presentation MUST NOT rewrite the original source's history.
Playback MUST support play/pause, seek, previous/next checkpoint and adjustable playback speed for timed material. At a checkpoint the recipient can inspect the document, calculation, diagram or other supported artifact as it existed then. The historical viewer MUST be visibly read-only and identify the captured revision. It MUST NOT resolve a checkpoint to the source's latest content merely because that is easier to load. Narrative media follows the selected timeline while retaining accessible captions/transcripts when provided.
Capture records MUST include SessionID, authorised source identities, ordered EventIDs, event/revision provenance, CheckpointIDs, timestamps/sequence, required base revisions or validated snapshot references, annotations and media references. Replay stores enough authorised retained state or pinned revision dependencies to reconstruct the included checkpoints under the declared retention policy. It MUST NOT depend on an ephemeral cache that disappears after the app closes. Missing bases, gaps and unavailable retained sources produce an explicit incomplete-checkpoint state, not invented reconstruction.
A Continue from here action is available only when the owning app supports an independent copy from that checkpoint and permissions permit it. The action shows destination, copy scope and unavailable dependencies, creates a new canonical artifact through the owner and opens that copy. It MUST NOT restore the original over its current version or imply that a Replay viewer has edit rights to the source.
TF-R03 — Review, sharing, failure and acceptance
Before sharing/export, Replay MUST provide an included-material review showing files, revisions, annotations, optional recordings and recipient access implications. Referenced live access and an exported independent snapshot are distinct. Copy/export rights are required for retained source bytes shared independently. Excluding or redacting captured content MUST also address derived thumbnails, search text, transcripts and dependent snapshots; metadata MUST not leak a supposedly removed secret. A presentation trim alone MUST not be labelled permanent redaction.
Session state MUST distinguish Not started, Recording, Paused, Finalising, Ready, Incomplete and Error. Interruption recovery resumes from a durable checkpoint/journal without claiming the missing interval was captured. Storage/quota exhaustion, unavailable owning apps and media-device failure MUST be visible, bounded and recoverable. Media failure MUST not silently destroy valid semantic checkpoints. Delete/retention cleanup applies to Replay-owned captures and assets, not the original source documents.
Replay acceptance MUST capture selected changes in two supported artifacts, exclude an unrelated open file, pause/resume, create an annotated checkpoint, restart after interruption, inspect historical state after the original advances, reveal a missing dependency, stop on revoked permission and create an authorised independent copy. Export/share review MUST detect excluded material in thumbnails/transcripts and MUST not claim that view-only rights permit exporting source bytes.
Variants
TF-V01 — Integrated variant UI and branch identity
Variants MUST ship within Write, Data, Present, Canvas, Picture, Prototype and Sites. It is not a separate app or Files organisation type. Version history answers which earlier state to return to; Variants lets users explore multiple directions in parallel without overwriting the starting version merely to experiment.
Each supported app MUST expose a consistent Variants entry near the document/version controls. The panel lists the main/current working line and named alternatives with base/current revision, modified state and useful compare/merge status. Required actions are Create variant, Switch, Rename, Duplicate variant, Compare, Bring changes back/Merge and Archive/remove variant through the owning recovery rules. The active variant MUST remain clearly identified in the editor title/status and save destination. A user MUST not unknowingly type into the main version after switching to an alternative.
Creating a variant records a stable VariantID, parent/base RevisionID and its own revision head. Switching resolves unsaved work through save or an explicit recoverable decision, not silent discard. A variant is a separately addressable branch of the owning artifact, not a manually duplicated filename or Files shortcut. Autosave, undo/redo, collaboration, search/deep links and restart MUST retain the active branch identity. A deep link to a variant MUST not silently open Main.
TF-V02 — Comparison, selective merge and conflicts
Compare MUST allow selection of base/source/target variants and provide content-appropriate side-by-side or change-focused presentation. The interface MUST identify additions, removals, edits and conflicts, offer next/previous change and show what accepting a selected change will affect. Colour alone MUST not convey the difference. An edit to the source or target during comparison invalidates or refreshes the merge preview rather than permitting a stale overwrite.
Merge MUST be an owning-app semantic operation against explicit source, base and expected target revisions. It requires a preview, selected changes or a clearly labelled whole-version choice, validation and a final commit. Compatible independent changes can be combined; overlapping or incompatible changes remain visible for resolution. Resolution must state Keep target, Use source or the supported manual choice. The implementation MUST NOT guess away conflicts or claim a generic byte merge is safe for every artifact type.
If safe selective merge is unavailable for a particular content operation, the app MUST provide a faithful compare-and-choose workflow and explain its scope. Choosing the source creates a new target revision while retaining recoverable history; it MUST NOT erase the target's earlier line. A failed/cancelled merge leaves both branches intact. Retry is idempotent, and a revision mismatch returns a conflict rather than overwriting newer work. Archive/remove MUST not delete the only retained content without the normal recovery/confirmation contract.
TF-V03 — Required owning-app comparison semantics
Write MUST compare stable text/block structure, edits, formatting and referenced objects; text and formatting conflicts remain distinguishable. Data MUST compare sheets/tables, stable rows/columns/cells, values, formulas, schema and named dependencies; it MUST not splice unrelated rows merely because their current indices match. Present MUST compare slide identity/order, objects, content, layout and presentation-level dependencies.
Canvas MUST compare stable objects, geometry, strokes, grouping, connectors and source references. Picture MUST compare layers, masks, transformations, adjustments and image data using the actual supported document structure; incompatible raster edits require a visible choose/manual-resolution path rather than invented pixel-level semantic merging. Prototype MUST compare typed objects/properties, formulas, bindings, component definitions and relationships and validate the resulting model before commit.
Sites MUST compare pages, components, routes, content, assets and settings through Sites' own model. Comparing, switching or merging a site variant MUST NOT publish or change production deployment by itself. Deployment remains an explicit existing Sites operation with its separate permissions and confirmations. Secrets, credentials and live provider state MUST not be copied into a branch merely because project settings are versioned.
Variants acceptance MUST create, edit, switch, compare and bring changes back in all seven apps; retain the starting version; expose an overlapping conflict; exercise the safe whole-version fallback; reject a stale merge; recover after save interruption; and reopen at the selected branch. Test each app's specific content families above. A shared button bar without working per-app comparison/merge is not coverage.
Cross-app delivery and acceptance
TF-X01 — Embeds, Boards pages and conversational editing
Boards MUST be able to include a Flow or Binder as a page referencing the same canonical Link document. It MUST also support a Files Sheet as a live Files-owned organisation page, rather than mislabelling Sheet as a Link type. The same registered embedding contract applies to the other declared compatible organisation/artifact surfaces. The host page MUST identify the owning source, respect reader/editor capability, provide Open original and preserve navigation back to the Board.
A Binder or Flow placed on a Sheet MUST open through the Sheet's chosen policy while keeping the surrounding notes/files and viewport. A Stash on a Sheet remains an ordered group. A Prototype embedded in Link, Boards or a Path MUST retain its actual model and permitted session-local controls, not become a screenshot while being described as interactive. Replay checkpoint views remain historical. Every supported combination MUST reference canonical entities; unsupported combinations show their exact limitation instead of silently flattening or cloning.
Spaces and the persistent AI bar MUST use the same typed APIs as the UI for authorised creation, organisation and editing. The current artifact, selection, source scope, active variant and permissions MUST be supplied explicitly. AI suggestions that change organisation rules, dependencies, route logic or other significant behaviour must be inspectable and undoable. AI access remains a separate permission; opening a private file in an embed does not authorise cloud upload. Core manual workflows MUST remain usable when AI is disabled or unavailable.
TF-X02 — Canonical API action catalogue
New UI operations extend the existing canonical namespaces: 9to1.Files.Organisation, 9to1.Link, 9to1.Prototype, 9to1.Paths and 9to1.Replay. Variants actions live under the owning app's Variants capability, such as 9to1.Write.Variants; the shared implementation MUST not bypass that owner's semantics. Existing Files, shared-object and NodeGraph actions remain authoritative for their existing operations rather than being copied into incompatible new APIs.
Every mutation request MUST include the target stable IDs, typed payload, operation/idempotency key and expected revision, or an explicitly declared create precondition. Successful results identify affected objects, resulting revision and any job/change-event identity. Read/list operations accept explicit scope and filters and return bounded pages with continuation cursors. Long-running query, capture, evaluation, export and merge work exposes JobID, progress, cancellation and durable result/error. Events have stable IDs and resumable cursors. Home resolves caller identity, scopes and risk before dispatch; possession of an ID never grants access.
Files.Organisation MUST expose Create/Get/List, UpdateSettings, AddReference, RemoveReference, Reorder and the type-specific operations: Project section CRUD and assignment; Sheet object/geometry/ink/shape/connector edits and opening policy; Tree group/node/connection edits plus separately authorised Tree-layout reads; Smart rule/scope/pin updates and membership explanation; Timeline date-source/assigned-range/period edits; Pipeline stage/gate/approval/transition/mapping actions; Catalogue field/schema/local-value/view edits; Stash order/position/review/compare selection; and Matrix axis/cell/membership operations. Generic command payloads MUST have registered typed schemas, not arbitrary unvalidated JSON.
Link MUST expose document creation and retrieval, block/container CRUD, ordering/geometry, source/section/revision-policy updates, outline/search, preview and export/import. Source edits dispatch to the source owner's registered actions. Prototype MUST expose object/property/component CRUD, formula/binding/relationship/event/action updates, validation, evaluation/run/stop/reset and session-input changes. Persisting runtime values as defaults is a separate authoring action.
Paths MUST expose step/route/content CRUD, validation, preview/test sessions, authored revision commit, StartAttempt, GetProgress, SubmitResponse, Advance, checkpoint/resume, Restart and confirmed progress deletion. Reader-scoped progress actions MUST not allow changing another reader's attempt or the authored route. Replay MUST expose source capability inspection, capture creation/start/pause/resume/stop, scope changes, checkpoints/annotations, event/checkpoint retrieval, historical preview, independent-copy requests, review/redaction and export/delete. Variant APIs MUST expose branch create/list/get/rename/switch state, compare, merge preview, resolution, commit and archive/recover through each required owning app.
Action schemas MUST declare required target permissions, source permissions, reversible/destructive risk, external effects, limits and partial-success behaviour. Required structured errors include InvalidArgument, ItemNotFound, PermissionRequired, PermissionDenied, RevisionConflict, UnsupportedCapability, ProviderUnavailable, Offline, QuotaExceeded, MissingSource, MissingSourceSection, InvalidReferenceCycle, TypeMismatch, ValidationFailed, DependencyUnavailable, TransitionBlocked, CaptureIncomplete, MergeConflict and Cancelled, using existing canonical equivalents where already defined. Errors identify recoverability and the affected operation without leaking forbidden source details. Every action exposed by a context menu, keyboard command or editor control MUST be accounted for in the generated UI/API parity manifest.
TF-X03 — Platforms, responsive behaviour and resource limits
Windows, 9to1-OS and browser/web MUST implement the useful core authoring and reader experiences for this tranche using the same canonical formats, account identity, domain APIs and permissions. Native interfaces use CUI/Home; web uses the existing authenticated web-service contract and MUST not require arbitrary local filesystem/process access. A narrow viewport by itself is not a reason to replace an otherwise supported app with an unrelated simplified data model.
The operating contract's Android/Go timing exception remains limited to newly added complex Terra-form surfaces. Any temporary read-only/limited-editing mode MUST still provide source-aware navigation, faithful content, accessible controls, per-user reading/progress state where supported and a visible explanation of unavailable authoring. Tree viewers still receive only View. No disabled authoring control may pretend to save. Full Android/Go authoring parity remains required after the temporary fallback; existing stronger mobile functionality MUST not regress.
At narrow sizes, navigation and inspectors become drawers or dedicated subviews, command overflow remains discoverable and pop-ups may use full-screen routes with preserved Back state. Flow retains continuous reading; Binder retains outline and open/close exploration; Files collections retain meaningful contents views; Paths retains choices and progress; Replay retains seeking/checkpoint inspection; Variants retains source/target identity in sequential comparison. Complex spatial authoring MUST provide fit and accessible structural alternatives, not an unreadable scaled-down desktop screenshot.
Large collections/graphs/documents MUST use bounded incremental loading, preview hydration, virtualisation and subscription cleanup. Closed/off-screen embeds MUST not continue uncontrolled computation, media playback or capture. Source resolution and exports MUST detect recursion and bound dependency traversal. Query, evaluation, capture, import/export and merge limits MUST be declared by the relevant capability and shown before an operation that exceeds them; limits MUST not silently truncate content. Existing platform-wide performance/resource thresholds remain mandatory. Actual supported workload sizes and measured results MUST be recorded rather than invented completion claims.
TF-X04 — Acceptance matrix and release evidence
Every numbered Terra-form requirement group MUST have a traceable implementation and test mapping. Evidence MUST distinguish source/unit coverage from real UI, runtime, cross-app, provider and package validation. The per-feature acceptance journeys above are mandatory minimums, not optional demonstrations. Test both ordinary authoring and reader roles, source permissions independent of host permissions, empty/loading/error states, source move/rename/delete, undo/redo, reopen, offline recovery and concurrent revisions.
The Files matrix MUST cover all ten organisation types as parent and nested target, recording the exact reason for any genuinely incoherent or unsupported provider combination. Required cross-app journeys include Homework Project sections; the same file in Tree, Smart, Timeline and Pipeline without copies; a Sheet containing a Stash and Binder; the Annual report Flow; Flow/Binder/Sheet as Boards pages; an interactive Prototype in an authored Path; a Replay historical checkpoint after the source changes; and Variants in every one of the seven named apps. Tests MUST verify canonical IDs and actual content effects, not only screenshots of controls.
Visual/accessibility QA MUST inspect desktop and narrow/touch layouts, keyboard-only operation, screen-reader names/structure, visible focus, dialog return focus, 200% scaling, themes/contrast and reduced motion. Inspect normal, selected, loading, read-only, conflict and missing-source states. Verify that no pane overlaps the AI bar or prevents access to Save/Close/Back and that large canvases/graphs remain operable through their outlines. API tests MUST repeat consequential UI operations and prove equivalent permissions, validation, idempotency and results.
Recovery tests MUST interrupt source hydration, collection edits, native import/export, Prototype evaluation, Path progress writes, Replay finalisation and variant merge. Preserve originals and recoverable drafts, expose exact partial/failure state and prove safe retry. Resource tests MUST use populated realistic collections, long Flows, nested Binders, branching Paths and captured multi-source histories; record workload, platform and observed results. Empty fixtures alone do not establish production usability.
The release evidence ledger MUST identify each group as VERIFIED, IMPLEMENTED-UNVERIFIED, MISSING or BLOCKED, with tested revision/build, platform, evidence and exact remaining exception. A temporary Android/Go fallback is recorded as a scoped incomplete-authoring exception, not full parity. These tests add to, and do not replace or weaken, the operating contract, full active specification, donor parity, security, privacy, performance, native-device and package gates.
TF-X05 — Open naming decision and implementation defaults
The separate Playgrounds naming/product relationship to Prototype remains OPEN. This section does not authorise another overlapping standalone app. All other named Terra-form behaviours above are active shipping scope. No legacy migration is required for genuinely new formats unless real existing data needs it; any such data MUST be inspected and preserved before a format change.
Where a low-level representation or provider adapter detail remains unspecified, workers MUST choose the narrowest coherent implementation consistent with these visible behaviours, version and document its contract, and validate it. This discretion MUST NOT be used to invent another product, drop a required control/workflow, weaken ownership or security, flatten a native format, conceal an unsupported platform or defer a named feature. Material product changes outside these requirements require an explicit canonical decision.
Pass 3: Sol Happy
SH-01 — Purpose and required outcome
Sol Happy is the “systems online” development pass.
The pass brings the 9to1 ecosystem onto its real production infrastructure: public websites, browser applications, CAKE ID authentication, subscription billing, hosted files, hosted websites, cloud-backed application services and operational management.
The required outcome is a connected service that a user can access from a fresh device without a development environment. A user MUST be able to visit the website, create or access their account, open an eligible application in their browser, create and save real work, continue that work in a desktop application, purchase an available subscription and use the resources that subscription provides.
Public production services MUST NOT depend on a developer’s PC remaining online, a temporary development tunnel or a manually started local server.
Sol Happy includes completing the production integration of existing features. It MUST NOT become a separate, reduced product that merely resembles the desktop ecosystem.
All existing mandatory product, donor-parity, accessibility, privacy, security, API and interoperability requirements remain active. Pass 3 does not retrospectively excuse missing requirements from earlier passes. The existing definition of implementation-complete continues to require validated behaviour rather than source presence, successful builds or rendered interfaces.
SH-02 — Baseline, authority and deployment permissions
Before implementation begins, the coordinator MUST identify the authoritative repository, current accepted baseline, active workstreams, existing deployments and relevant infrastructure accounts. Existing work, credentials, production configuration and user data MUST be preserved.
The pass MUST maintain a requirement ledger using VERIFIED, IMPLEMENTED-UNVERIFIED, MISSING and BLOCKED, with evidence tied to the exact tested revision, environment and platform. Existing acceptance evidence MUST be re-evaluated where changes affect its validity.
This specification remains the product authority. Infrastructure notes, repository documentation and worker reports MUST NOT introduce competing requirements or silently narrow the pass.
Development, staging and production MUST be distinguishable. Test payments, test accounts, preview deployments and development storage MUST NOT be presented as live production services.
Approval to develop this pass is not blanket approval to spend money or change live production routing. Enabling billable services, increasing spending limits, making live test charges, changing production DNS, retiring WordPress or deleting production resources requires explicit authorisation covering the relevant action.
Independent implementation and testing MUST continue while a particular external approval is pending. A pending approval remains a visible deployment gate, not an excuse to stop unrelated work.
Sol Happy’s execution model and deadline MUST be specified separately. Terra-form’s deadline and temporary Android/Go fallback MUST NOT automatically become Pass 3 rules.
SH-03 — Production architecture and ownership
Cloudflare is the intended production hosting platform for the public websites, web applications, hosted files and hosted sites. Stripe provides subscription payment processing and associated billing services.
These providers MUST NOT replace 9to1’s product ownership boundaries.
CAKE ID and the shared account services own identity, sessions and entitlement evaluation. Files owns canonical file identity, storage operations, sharing, versions and synchronisation. Sites owns website authoring and deployment orchestration. Stripe supplies verified payment and subscription facts; it does not become the file-permission or application-authorisation system.
The proposed Cloudflare service mapping is:
Responsibility
Proposed implementation
Public website and browser-application delivery
Cloudflare-hosted, revision-pinned frontend deployments
Trusted API and integration entry points
Cloudflare Workers with explicitly scoped service bindings
File bytes, assets and deployment artifacts
R2, separated by purpose and access policy
Structured metadata and coordinated state
D1 and/or Durable Objects, selected against the required transaction and consistency contracts
Deferred processing and delivery
Queues and the existing job orchestration contracts
Cloudflare documents these services as different storage, coordination and task-processing building blocks. The exact combination MUST be validated against 9to1’s runtime, consistency, capacity and recovery requirements; it MUST NOT be selected merely because all services share one provider. Eventually consistent KV MUST NOT be the sole authority for operations requiring immediate, transactional enforcement. (developers.cloudflare.com)
Public first-party websites MUST be independently deployable from customer projects and customer build workloads. A failed customer deployment or exhausted customer allocation MUST NOT take the main website offline.
Every environment MUST have explicit resource bindings, secret references, deployment identities and rollback procedures. Private credentials MUST NOT enter browser bundles, public assets, repository history or ordinary diagnostic output.
SH-04 — WordPress-to-Cloudflare website migration
The pass MUST migrate the production website away from its WordPress runtime dependency.
The intended architecture for cakemods.com and 9to1.com is:
Editable Sites project → canonical Files/Stack source → validated build → Cloudflare production deployment.
Sites remains the authoring layer; the public websites are served from their separate production deployments. Published output MUST NOT become the only surviving copy of the website. This follows the existing Sites source and deployment authority contract.
Before migration, the implementer MUST inventory the actual website’s pages, routes, assets, redirects, navigation, forms, account links, downloads and backend dependencies. Every retained capability MUST have a working destination in the replacement.
The migration MUST preserve required content and useful behaviour. It MUST NOT substitute screenshots, flattened pages or an unrelated redesign for the existing site and editor functionality. The cakemods site-plugin remains the donor reference for applicable authoring behaviour.
Moving DNS or placing Cloudflare in front of the existing WordPress server does not satisfy the migration requirement. The replacement MUST operate without WordPress supplying its ordinary public runtime, account backend or content-management operations.
Domain registration MUST NOT be transferred again merely to complete hosting migration. Existing DNS configuration MUST be inspected, and unrelated records—including mail and verification records—MUST be preserved.
The replacement MUST first be validated in a non-production environment. Cutover requires a recoverable backup, a verified destination, a plan for any writes during migration and an authorised rollback path. WordPress MUST NOT be deleted or cancelled simply because the new homepage loads.
There is no requirement to invent a legacy consumer-data migration programme for data that does not exist. Any real accounts, content, submissions or other records discovered during inspection MUST nevertheless be preserved or deliberately migrated.
SH-05 — CAKE ID and account services online
Desktop and web MUST use the same CAKE ID, account identity, organisation context and entitlement services. Ordinary users MUST NOT require WordPress accounts.
Authentication MUST preserve the existing secure public-client contract, including the specified browser-based authorisation flow or an explicitly equivalent secure implementation. Clients MUST NOT contain provider credentials, billing secrets or entitlement-signing secrets.
The supported registration, sign-in, sign-out, recovery, profile, session-inspection and session-revocation journeys MUST work against the production backend. Any journey that sends verification or recovery email MUST use a configured delivery service and expose delivery failures honestly.
Any transition from WordPress-linked authentication MUST use verified account mappings and recovery rules. Matching a mutable username MUST NOT transfer account ownership, administrative authority or paid entitlements.
Jacob’s reserved @CroakyJake handle and account-bound free Business feature grant MUST survive the transition. That grant MUST NOT become an exemption from resource accounting, security permissions or third-party spending approval.
Browser applications MUST use authenticated equivalents of Home’s shared services without requiring a local Home installation. Permission approval, trust, revocation and audit semantics MUST remain consistent with native applications.
Personal and organisation contexts MUST remain separate throughout navigation, storage, billing, search and AI access. Switching accounts or organisations MUST NOT expose cached private information from the previous context.
SH-06 — Full browser versions of the applications
Every non-exempt Workspace and AI application MUST have a functional browser version.
The target is the same application on the web, not a companion dashboard, viewer-only edition or simplified alternative. At equivalent viewport sizes, the browser version MUST preserve the desktop application’s information architecture, tools, editor structure, commands, menus, selection behaviour, settings and supported workflows.
Browser-specific adaptations are permitted for actual capability differences and responsive layouts. They MUST NOT justify avoidable feature loss.
Web implementations MUST preserve CUI’s public semantics, shared component contracts, canonical state identities and supported actions. A browser-specific runtime is permitted; an independently redesigned, incompatible UI framework is not the intended outcome.
Each app MUST support its applicable create, open, edit, save, reopen, history, import/export, sharing and recovery operations. The shared contextual AI bar MUST operate on the real semantic artifact through authorised owning-app APIs.
The web inventory MUST include the active Terra-form additions: Link, Prototype, Paths, Replay, Files’ organisation types and Variants in their owning applications. These retain their existing ownership and terminology; they MUST NOT be reorganised into different products for the web implementation.
Each application MUST have a capability matrix identifying supported browser operations, equivalent adaptations and exact remaining restrictions. A restriction MUST identify the missing capability, affected operation, user-visible behaviour and validation evidence.
A desktop-only feature is not sufficient reason to omit an otherwise useful web app. Mini Computer retains its existing web exemption unless the required hosted-compute capability is explicitly provided. Other missing native capabilities MUST NOT be represented as available merely because a browser interface exists.
Direct links, browser refresh, back/forward navigation and account restoration MUST preserve the intended application and artifact context. Unsupported browsers MUST receive a meaningful compatibility state rather than a broken interface.
SH-07 — Files and 9to1 Drive production hosting
9to1 Drive MUST become a real hosted storage service used by the web and desktop applications.
A file uploaded in the browser and opened on desktop MUST retain the same FileID and durable revision history. Local materialisation is a managed replica, not an unrelated imported copy. Files remains responsible for storage and filesystem operations; the owning application remains responsible for semantic document editing and collaboration.
Private file storage MUST remain private. Protected downloads and shares MUST use access-controlled routes that enforce current account, organisation and object permissions. Possession of an object key MUST NOT grant access.
R2’s public development endpoint MUST NOT be used as the production delivery mechanism or as a substitute for protected sharing. Cloudflare explicitly identifies r2.dev as development-oriented rather than production hosting. (developers.cloudflare.com)
Transfers MUST have durable identities, resumable progress, cancellation, integrity validation and recoverable failure states. Upload completion MUST not be reported until both content and the authoritative metadata commit have succeeded. Interrupted operations MUST be reconciled without invisible orphan uploads or duplicated quota charges.
Storage enforcement MUST account for committed usage and in-flight reservations. Concurrent uploads MUST NOT overspend the same allocation.
Normal connected synchronisation MUST be push-based and incremental, with durable cursors and replay-safe reconciliation. Polling and full rescans remain recovery mechanisms rather than the ordinary propagation path.
Sharing, search, previews, AI retrieval, version restoration and Trash MUST operate on the same canonical objects and permissions. Restoring an earlier revision MUST preserve subsequent history. Ordinary deletion remains recoverable; permanent purge remains a distinct protected operation.
SH-08 — Sites publishing and customer hosting
Sites MUST publish real websites to Cloudflare through its existing deployment model.
A published deployment MUST identify its SiteID, source revision, build/configuration revision, environment, provider result and domain bindings. Preview and production MUST remain distinct.
Publishing MUST include actual asset delivery, route handling and any supported server-side functionality. Successful static deployment MUST NOT be used to claim that required forms, CMS, authentication or dynamic application behaviour also works.
Builds and customer-supplied code MUST execute within appropriately isolated, authorised environments. Customer code MUST NOT inherit the credentials or privileges of CAKE’s account, billing or administrative services.
A failed build or deployment MUST preserve the previous working deployment. Rollback MUST restore a known deployment without deleting newer source history. These behaviours extend the existing deployment and publishing safeguards.
First-party addresses, slug validation, reserved names, misleading-name review, custom-domain ownership verification and DNS/TLS readiness MUST implement the existing Sites contract. The default sites.9to1.uk/<site-slug> namespace MUST NOT silently become a different address scheme.
Browser isolation requires an explicit design decision. Different paths on the same hostname are not separate browser origins. The implementation MUST NOT assume that /site-a and /site-b isolate customer JavaScript, browser storage or other origin-scoped capabilities. A validated isolation design—or an explicitly approved namespace amendment—is required before arbitrary customer active content ships. (developer.mozilla.org)
Hosting limits MUST be enforced server-side. The existing Free-site inactivity policy MUST take affected sites offline without deleting their stored project data.
SH-09 — Real Stripe subscriptions and billing
Canonical plans and resource configuration
Stripe integration MUST implement the canonical subscription model rather than replace it with whatever is easiest to express in a pricing widget.
Preset identity, customised resource quantities, price-threshold entitlements and account-bound grants MUST remain distinct. The server MUST calculate effective access; clients MUST NOT grant resources from a displayed plan name or locally supplied price.
Existing preset definitions MUST remain versioned. Changing a commercial preset MUST NOT silently rewrite existing subscriber allocations. Unspecified quantities MUST remain unresolved rather than being invented during Stripe setup.
Checkout and activation
Checkout MUST begin from an authenticated, server-generated configuration quote. The quote MUST identify the account or organisation, resource configuration, currency, billing cadence, applicable charges and effective change timing.
The backend MUST bind Stripe customer, subscription, price and invoice identifiers to the correct canonical account or organisation. Usernames and client-supplied account claims MUST NOT determine that binding.
Returning to a success page MUST NOT itself activate paid resources. Activation requires verified payment/subscription state and a successful entitlement update.
A payment that succeeds while provisioning is delayed MUST produce a recoverable pending state. Retrying that operation MUST NOT charge the customer again.
Webhooks and reconciliation
Webhook processing MUST verify Stripe signatures against the raw request body, durably record accepted events and process them through retry-safe handlers.
The implementation MUST handle duplicate deliveries and out-of-order events. It MUST prevent both repeated event processing and repeated business effects, such as granting the same invoice’s allocation twice. Stripe does not guarantee event order, and its documentation explicitly requires duplicate-event handling. (docs.stripe.com)
The backend MUST support reconciliation against current Stripe objects after delivery failures or inconsistent local state. A delayed older event MUST NOT overwrite a newer valid subscription configuration.
Payment state, entitlement state and provisioning state MUST remain separately diagnosable.
Customer management and lifecycle
Users MUST be able to manage payment methods, inspect invoices, manage supported subscription configurations and cancel through authenticated billing flows.
Stripe’s customer portal MAY provide supported account-management functions. It MUST NOT be the only implementation of custom resource changes: Stripe documents limitations on updating subscriptions containing multiple products or usage-based billing. Those configurations require a compatible trusted CAKE billing flow. (docs.stripe.com)
Plan changes MUST preview the resulting price, resource allocation, effective date and any immediate charge or credit. Renewal failures, additional payment authentication, cancellation, refunds and disputes MUST map to explicit account states under the approved billing policy.
Billing failure or downgrade MUST NOT silently delete user files, site source or organisation content. Billing management, authorised export and recovery MUST remain available through the appropriate routes.
Business and Business + remain organisation add-ons with separately funded resources. Unlimited seat capacity MUST NOT be interpreted as unlimited storage or AI usage. Existing seat-remediation and account-bound grant rules remain applicable.
SH-10 — Cloud AI and connected application services
Cloud-backed features MUST use real provider connections, with credentials held by trusted services.
The AI gateway MUST enforce identity, organisation policy, model entitlement, resource limits and Dust before execution. It MUST support streaming, cancellation, provider failures and recoverable interrupted sessions.
Usage MUST follow the existing reserve → run → settle contract. Parallel requests MUST NOT spend the same balance twice, and uncertain provider outcomes MUST remain subject to reconciliation rather than arbitrary charging or credit creation. Local models and core local tools MUST NOT be charged as cloud AI usage.
Desktop, web and Personal API access MUST draw from the same applicable entitlement and usage services. Personal API access retains its existing eligibility and shared-allocation rules.
Every existing feature that declares an online dependency MUST have that dependency implemented and validated. This includes applicable collaboration, organisation services, provider connections, notifications, Forms responses, published integrations, Agents and Automations.
Execution location MUST be explicit. A browser task, a cloud-hosted task and a task requiring an enrolled desktop device are different capabilities. Closing a tab MUST NOT silently terminate a task advertised as cloud-hosted; an offline device MUST NOT be shown as executing work.
Long-running operations MUST expose durable job identity, progress, cancellation, retries and results. Reconnection MUST NOT repeat consequential actions. Persistent work MUST retain its authorised identity, scope and funding source.
SH-11 — Operations, security and release delivery
The production service MUST include health checks, actionable failure reporting, privacy-preserving diagnostics and alerts for material outages, failed billing processing, failed jobs and approaching resource limits.
Rate limits, account quotas and workload admission controls MUST prevent one customer from consuming another customer’s allocation or exhausting shared services without bounds. Spending alerts MUST NOT be treated as equivalent to an enforced spending ceiling.
Backups and recovery MUST cover canonical metadata, file revisions, account mappings, entitlement records, site source and deployment configuration—not merely a collection of uploaded bytes. Restoration MUST be tested, with documented recovery objectives.
The existing Privacy Ceiling applies to hosted services, provider integrations, telemetry, retention, exports and deletion propagation. Moving functionality online MUST NOT silently broaden AI access or weaken promised encryption.
Deployment pipelines MUST identify exact source revisions, validate changes before activation and support rollback. Database/schema and client updates MUST account for already-open browser sessions and older supported native clients.
Public download and update paths MUST provide real, verified release artifacts. Home and Launcher MUST continue using their shared package authority, integrity checks and staged activation rather than separate manually maintained update lists.
SH-12 — End-to-end acceptance
Acceptance MUST exercise the deployed services, not only mocks or isolated components.
Journey
Required evidence
Fresh-device onboarding
A new browser session can register or sign in, reach eligible apps and save persistent work without local Home or development tooling.
Web/desktop continuity
An artifact created on one surface opens and edits on the other with the same canonical identity, content, permissions and history.
Application parity
Every in-scope app passes its applicable browser workflows, accessibility checks and recorded capability matrix.
Storage integrity
Interrupted and concurrent uploads resume or fail safely; quotas remain correct; no corrupt file is reported as complete.
Subscription lifecycle
Checkout, verified activation, configuration changes, renewal failure and cancellation produce the correct account and resource states.
Billing replay
Duplicate, delayed and reordered events cannot duplicate charges, allocations or entitlement transitions.
Publishing
A real Sites project deploys, serves its required dynamic behaviour, verifies its domain and rolls back without losing source.
Isolation
Cross-account access, revoked sharing and malicious customer content cannot expose another account’s files, sessions or administrative services.
Recovery
A tested restore and redeployment recover the service from preserved canonical state.
Independent operation
Public websites and cloud-hosted services remain operational without the developer’s PC and survive representative customer-workload failures.
Payment failure scenarios MUST first be exercised using appropriate test facilities. Live-mode validation requires an authorised merchant configuration and explicit approval for any actual charge. Test-mode success alone MUST NOT be reported as proof of live billing.
Visual and interaction testing MUST cover populated workloads, narrow layouts, keyboard operation, screen-reader semantics, 200% scaling, themes, reduced motion and failure/recovery states.
SH-13 — Decisions required before affected functionality goes live
The following items remain explicit launch decisions rather than implementation guesses.
Commercial catalogue and lifecycle policy. Finalise all offered resource allocations, usage periods, rollover rules, configuration prices, downgrade behaviour, grace periods and retention consequences. The existing specification leaves material allocations and billing policies unresolved. Undefined configurations MUST NOT be offered for purchase.
Currency and entitlement-price calculation. Define how tax, discounts, promotional credits and non-monthly billing affect EntitlementPriceMonthly. Resolve the existing GBP resource pricing and USD Business add-ons through an approved billing policy. Stripe requires prices within a single multi-product subscription to use the same currency; silent relabelling or conversion is not acceptable. (docs.stripe.com)
Production service configuration. Confirm the account-authentication implementation, transactional delivery provider, database/coordination boundaries, supported runtime capabilities and environment ownership. Existing compatible infrastructure MUST be inspected before replacement.
Customer-site browser isolation. Approve the isolation mechanism for active content under the specified path-based public addresses. Any change to the canonical URL model requires an explicit specification amendment.
Operational and launch parameters. Confirm supported browser versions, measurable performance/capacity targets, recovery objectives, infrastructure budgets, merchant readiness and production cutover authorisation.
These decisions MUST block only their affected release paths. They MUST NOT be silently resolved by a worker, hidden behind defaults or used to stop independent implementation.
Release exit gate
Sol Happy is complete only when the required online services are implemented, integrated, deployed to their authorised environments and validated against the applicable specification.
Implemented, tested, deployed and commercially enabled MUST remain distinguishable states.
The final evidence ledger MUST identify the tested release, deployed service versions, functioning user journeys and every remaining blocker or approved scoped exception. No service may be described as online merely because its interface exists, a provider account has been connected or a test request succeeded.
Pass 4: Lunar Eclipse
// Finishing pass
Spaces QOL
User Interface
Screenshots taken from ChatGPT for reference
Sidebar
Spaces sidebar - Replaces the dropdown switcher by default.
Option in settings between dropdown switcher and sidebar.
Horizontal Tabs
Horizontal tabs in spaces app for multiple chats, open windows, etc.
Other 9to1 apps (e.g. browse) can be embedded into spaces via a tab, as well as things like chats and images. Thanks to a shared ui framework, the design should be able to adapt to fit seamlessly with the rest of the spaces interface.
Local Chats
Send local chat directly to another device
Dev QOL
Dev sidebar
Horizontal tabs in dev app
Pass 4: Droid
// Android ROM Pass
Pass tan(90): (OUT OF SCOPE) Choo Choo
Training Lab
Training Lab is an explicitly deferred AI Studio project/surface and is OUT OF SCOPE for the release candidate. It is reserved for future model-training/fine-tuning and related dataset/training workflows, but its exact product scope, supported training methods/backends, dataset model, safety constraints, artifact formats, resource scheduling, APIs and acceptance requirements are not yet specified.
Release-candidate AI Studio implementations MUST NOT expose Training Lab as an in-scope project type, navigation/sidebar entry, New Project option or partially functional placeholder. Future implementation requires a separate canonical specification before Training Lab becomes in scope.
